Title: England win ODI series in South Africa after Tammy Beaumont steadies ship
Author: Unknown
Source: guardian
Published: 2024-12-11T21:21:04Z
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2024/dec/11/england-seal-series-victory-after-tammy-beaumont-steadies-the-ship
----------------------------------------
England scrapped their way to a six-wicket win in the third ODI against South Africa on Wednesday to win the series 2-1, relying on the steadying hand of Tammy Beaumont after Marizanne Kapp had left them wobbling perilously at 25 for three. After a two-and-a-half-hour rain delay, England were given a DLS-revised target of 152 in 23 overs, but in a near-repeat of their disastrous performance in the first ODI, Kapp’s ferocious new-ball spell proved costly. Nat Sciver-Brunt cut to backward point to rack up her second duck in three matches, while the captain, Heather Knight, was visibly frustrated when Kapp’s nip-backer took out her off stump, gesturing towards some apparent movement behind the bowler’s arm as she walked off. But Kapp was permitted only a five-over spell, and once she had completed that Beaumont got her head down, found the gaps and calmly took England towards their target, bringing up her fastest ever ODI fifty (35 balls). She also appeared to have an infectious effect on Amy Jones, who struck two sweet boundaries off Nadine de Klerk, the pair’s 90-run partnership ensuring England’s win came with 24 balls to spare. Beaumont joked that the win was down to the haircut she had received from teammate Kate Cross on the eve of the game: “It made me a lot lighter running between the wickets,” she said. Earlier, England had been forced to adapt their bowling plans after Cross collapsed in her follow-through with a back spasm during the first over, and had to leave the field for treatment. Alice Capsey has rarely bowled in international cricket – she has sent down only 12.5 overs for England in the past year – and would have scarcely been expecting to be called upon here, but was thrust into the spotlight: tasked with first completing Cross’s over, then bowling nine more of her own. Admittedly, Capsey conceded 59 runs, but her two wickets were critical to a South African middle-order collapse which threw away any advantage gained by Laura Wolvaardt’s patient half-century up top. Some tight death bowling eventually restricted them to an underwhelming 233 for eight. Knight described it as “a brilliant effort”. “To rally around on what was a flat wicket in the heat was outstanding. We were put under pressure throughout, so to win the game comfortably in the end was really pleasing.” The tour concludes with a four-day Test in Bloemfontein, beginning on Sunday.