Title: What were the missed chances to prevent Sara Sharif’s death?
Author: Unknown
Source: guardian
Published: 2024-12-11T13:22:51Z
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2024/dec/11/sara-sharif-death-what-were-the-missed-chances
----------------------------------------
The murder of Sara Sharif has raised serious questions about missed chances to prevent her death, with the case revealing 15 occasions in which it was flagged to authorities that the schoolgirl was potentially in danger before she was killed in 2023. For more than a decade, Urfan Sharif, 43, had repeatedly attracted the attention of police, social services and schools. He was never charged in relation to previous abuse allegations made against him, and was given custody of Sara in 2019 despite the years-long concerns about the risk he posed. The case will now be the focus of a local safeguarding review to examine the missed opportunities and whether more could have been done to prevent Sara’s death. Here is a timeline of 15 events leading up to her murder, which come from police, social services and school records heard during the seven-week trial at the Old Bailey. 11 January 2013 Sara Sharif is made the subject to a child protection plan at birth due to her father, Urfan Sharif, being accused of attacking three women including her biological mother, Olga Domin, as well as hitting and biting children. Sara is allowed to remain with her father. 22 February 2013 Social services and police are told that Sharif has slapped a child around the face. 7 May 2013 A social worker spots a burn mark on a child’s leg and Sharif claims it was a barbecue accident. Sharif failed to report the incident, contrary to a social services agreement. Five months later, a child is seen with a burn mark sustained from a domestic iron. Sharif tells social services the child had knocked into the iron. 2014 A child tells a social worker Sharif smashed up a TV and punched Domin. November 2014 Sara is taken into foster care for a short stint after a child tells a social worker about a bite mark. A note from a social worker reads that Sara flinches when Sharif tells her off during a supervised contact session and appears surprised when he picks her up and cuddles her. Sara is later returned to her father. December 2014 A child tells a social worker they do not like Sharif because he punches them all over their body and gives them lots of bruises. 29 January 2015 A social worker is told that Sharif waved a knife around at home in what he claimed was a “zombie” game. Social worker records from 2015 note allegations that Sharif hit and kicked Domin and the pair threatened to kill each other. February 2015 A child tells their foster carer that Sharif used to hit them on the bottom with a belt. 2015 Olga Domin tells social services that Urfan Sharif tightened a belt around her neck. Sara is returned to Domin’s care later that year. A social worker who worked with the family around this time said female colleagues found Sharif “coercive”. One reported that Sharif told her she must have a mental illness. A social worker notes Sharif would get easily irritated during supervised meetings with Sara and she would shout at him to go away when he went over to her. In September 2015, a child is heard to say that Sharif hit and kicked them every day. October 2019 Sharif applies to Guildford family court for custody of Sara. Sara has accused Domin of abuse, it is alleged during the trial, and it is understood that Surrey county council supports her return to her father because that is Sara’s preference. 6 June 2022 A teacher spots a bruise under Sara’s left eye, which is recorded in the school’s child protection online monitoring system (CPOMS). Sara initially does not reveal what happened, before saying another child hit her. The teacher raises concerns with Sara’s stepmother, Beinash Batool. A week later, Sharif informs staff he wants to homeschool Sara. She does not return to school until the start of the next academic year. 10 March 2023 A teacher spots Sara with bruises to her chin and right eye. Sara says she fell on roller skates and tries to cover her face with her headscarf. When she gives a different story to a safeguarding lead, the school contacts Surrey council’s children’s single point of access (CSPA) safeguarding line and makes a referral to social services. Sara is known to authorities but there has been no contact with her family for four years. Social services categorises the case as the second-highest priority and makes requests for information from wider agencies, before closing the case after six days. 17 March 2023 Batool is overheard referring to children as “bastards, motherfuckers and whores” in the playground. A report is logged on CPOMS and the school contacts CSPA on 20 March but a written referral is not made. 28 March 2023 Batool claims a mark on Sara’s cheek, which appears to be a bruise, has been caused by a pen. The teacher tells the school safeguarding lead. It is recorded on CPOMS. 17 April 2023 Sharif informs the headteacher that he will be homeschooling Sara with immediate effect. It is recorded on CPOMS. The school contacts the CSPA line for advice and is told to make a referral if there are concerns. Staff see Sara later that day at school pickup and she seems fine, even though Sharif has beaten her earlier that day, according to evidence heard in court. A referral is not made. She is never seen outside the home again.