Title: Australia beat India by 83 runs: third women’s cricket ODI – as it happened
Author: Unknown
Source: guardian
Published: 2024-12-11T12:41:13Z
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2024/dec/11/australia-vs-india-womens-cricket-odi-one-day-international-third-match-live-updates-scores-results-waca-perth
----------------------------------------
Righto, that’s me done here. Thanks for joining us and congratulations to Australia. The OBO will return… but for now we have the report from Australia’s victory in the third ODI against India. Post Match Presentation: Annabel Sutherland bags the Player of the Match and Player of the Series: Their quicks challenged us and picked up a few wickets early, that made things tough. Ash and I were able to grind through and cash in towards the back end. The girls have batted beautifully, we spoke about how we want to play and really glad it came off in these two games.” India captain, Harmanpreet Kaur: We bowled well and we were in the game. We have a lot to lean from these games. We’ll go back and analyse the tour. We did well in patches but did not keep the momentum. We have to learn how to take things till the end.” Australia captain, Tahlia McGrath: Very happy, Ash (Gardner) and Belsy (Sutherland) were good with bat and ball. Someone different has stood up every game, it’s a collective approach and we back each other and everyone is stoked for them. Our batting is the highlight for me, our top four took the game on in game two, Belsy today, in patches we were good with the ball but there’s a bit of work to do there in terms of being consistent.” Alana King has Titas Sadhu caught by captain Tahlia McGrath and that’s the win! A comfortable one for Australia in the end, things fell apart for India after Smriti Mandha departed after notching up her fourt ODI century of the calendar year. Australia take the series 3-0, they’ve looked dominant with bat and ball, the only bum note a few ropey dropped chances that blotted their otherwise pristine copybook. 45th over: India 215-9 (Sadhu 3, Singh 8) On we go… but not for long because… 44th over: India 213-9 (Sadhu 2, Singh 8) I’m not saying this match is a foregone conclusion but I have started doing an online grocery order in a separate tab. Don’t tell the boss. Ash Gardner rattles through her last over and finishes with 5-30 off her ten overs. Class act. 43rd over: India 211-9 (Sadhu 2, Singh 6) Renuka Singh slaps a weary looking Sutherland down the ground for four. 42nd over: India 205-9 (Sadhu 1, Singh 1) Australia one wicket away from wrapping up the match and the series. The debate rages between who should get Player of the match – Ash Gardner with her five wickets and fifty with the bat or Annabel Sutherland with her one wicket and century with the bat. I think it has to be Gardner, India were looking in control before she turned the match with this spell. Ash Gardner has five wickets! Slides one past Reddy’s sweep and three reds on DRS tell the tale. What a spell this has been, Gardner has ripped through India in her last four overs. 41st over: India 203-8 (Reddy 5, Sadhu 0) The game slips away from India, Australia hunting the final two wickets to complete a 3-0 series sweep. 40th over: India 201-8 (Reddy 4, Sadhu) Gardner picks up two in the over, again! She ties Thakor down and then snares her with the last, a whip into the leg side taken by Kim Garth. Gardner on the cusp of a five wicket haul, Annabel Sutherland’s player of the match gong might not be a done deal… Caught! Ash Gardner gets her third wicket as Minnu Mani plinks an easy catch to Phoebe Litchfield who takes the catch. Nervous laughter all round. 39th over: India 201-6 (Reddy 4, Mani 8) Schutt can’t atone for her butter fingers, Mani clears the front leg and swipes her down the ground for four. 38th over: India 195-6 (Reddy 3, Mani 3) Gardner into her seventh over, she has her dander up now after two wickets in her previous. OH MY DAYS! Gardner should have had another too but Megan Schutt spills an absolute goobah at short cover. Dolly. Lollipop. Sitter. You name it. A shocker. I make that three easy chances down off Gardner in this match. 37th over: India 192-6 (Reddy 2, Mani 1) A stiff task now for India with 107 needed off 78 balls and with just four wickets left. Arundhati Reddy and Minnu Mani both newbies at the crease. Another one bites the dust! Rodrigues has to go now after flapping at a Schutt short ball, the bowler taking a loopy catch over her shoulder. The Aussies swarm as they take control of this match. Three wickets fall without a run being scored. Two wickets in the over! Gardner strikes again as Deepti Sharma gets a tickle oto her pad that is swallowed by Mooney behind the stumps. The umpire says no but DRS showed the spike on snicko. Australia hitting back in Perth. 36th over: India 189-5 (Rodrigues 16) Gone! Gardner is smacked down the ground for four by Mandhana but gets her revenge immediately by sliding one through and knocking back middle stump! That’s the end of a brilliant knock, Gardner has pocketed Mandhana FIVE times in ODI cricket now. 35th over: India 184-3 (Mandhana 101, Rodrigues 15) Just three runs off the next over, India can’t afford to bask in Mandhana’s ton for too long, they need 115 runs off 90 deliveries. 34th over: India 181-3 (Mandhana 100, Rodrigues 14) Brilliant batting by Rodrigues! She lofts Alana King for SIX with a slog sweep wide of long on and picks the gaps for three twos. Century for Smriti Mandhana! The class left-hander tickles a two off her legs to go to her ninth ODI hundred and her fourth of this calendar year! She’s the first female player to do that too. Her century has come at a run a ball and she’s led from the front in this chase. Well batted. India need 118 from 96 balls. 33rd over: India 166-3 (Mandhana 98, Rodrigues 1) Jemimah Rodrigues is the new batter, which might not be a bad thing for India. She can score quickly and played a sparky innings the other day in the second match of the series. An uppercut run up the face of the bat sees her open her account. India lose their skipper! Sutherland gets the breakthrough, although Kaur was at fault in the main, failing to keep an on drive on the carpet and finding the hands of Kim Garth. 32nd over: India 162-2 (Mandhana 98, Kaur 10) The two experienced hands rotate strike and keep India inching onwards. Six off the over. 31st over: India 156-2 (Mandhana 96, Kaur 6) Shot! Mandhana slog sweeps Molineux for four at the start of the over. Three singles make it seven off the over and Mandhana is one shot away from three figures. 30th over: India 149-2 (Mandhana 90, Kaur 5) King worked around for four runs. Mandhana closing in on a 9th ODI hundred. If that doesn’t jinx her… 29th over: India 145-2 (Mandhana 88, Kaur 3) Molineux backs up the over from King, mixing up her speeds and beating the bat on a couple of deliveries. Whoops! Spoke too soon, she spears five wides down the leg side with her last delivery to spoil the over. India need 154 runs from 126 balls. 28th over: India 136-2 (Mandhana 85, Kaur 2) A pulse raising prospect now with Harmanpreet coming out to the middle to join a purring Mandhana. King is landing them beautifully and Kaur gets a thick edge past point to get off the mark. Game on! King strikes with her second ball! Deol drives powerfully but too straight and King clings on to a sharp return catch. She slams the ball into the turf in celebration. She is pumped. 27th over: India 134-1 (Mandhana 84, Deol 39) Shot! Mandhana lofts Molineux over extra cover for four and then uses her crease to pick up a couple into the leg side. Surely time for King? 26th over: India 126-1 (Mandhana 78, Deol 38) Justin Langer is calling for Alana King to be called upon, Australia do need to shake things up. Mandhana and Deol look comfortable (cramp notwithstanding) as they work the ones and twos. Six off McGrath’s over, collected without fuss. 25th over: India 120-1 (Mandhana 74, Deol 37) Deol is back in action after a going over from the physio. The mercury is still touching 39 degrees in Perth. We’ve got a short delay here whilst Deol suffers from cramp and takes on board some pickle juice. Yummy. The umpires call for other (less revolting) drinks. 24th over: India 117-1 (Mandhana 72, Deol 36) Six! Mandhana breaks the green and gold shackles by trotting down the wicket and depositing the new bowler – Tahlia McGrath – for a big one back over the bowler’s head. A glide for two then brings up the 100 partnership between Mandhana and Deol. They are keeping their side in the chase. 23rd over: India 108-1 (Mandhana 63, Deol 36) After all that there was just a solitary single off Molineux’s first over. And crucially, no wicket. WICKET OVERTURNED! Molineux pins Deol in front and the umpire raises the finger. Justin Langer is in the commentary box and says he has his finger up… replays show the ball was missing the stumps and the decision is over turned. Hard luck ‘JL’. I do like the wild eyed Langer. I like writing about him too. His appearance with a mute Graeme Hick on series one of The Test was so strangely compelling… 22nd over: India 107-1 (Mandhana 62, Deol 36) Just a couple off Ash Gardner. Sophie Molineux and her left-arm spin are being summoned. 21st over: India 105-1 (Mandhana 61, Deol 35) Australia and the Perth wicket are looking decidedly flat. India bring up their hundred as Perry misses her line and length again, Mandhana flicking gratefully off her hip for four runs. 20th over: India 99-1 (Mandhana 56, Deol 34) Drop! Another chance goes begging! Deol gets her second life as she sweeps Gardner to Megan Schutt at square leg, the fielder makes a hash of it and the ball hits the turf. Gardner can barely look. That should’ve been swallowed. 19th over: India 97-1 (Mandhana 55, Deol 33) Ellyse Perry returns for a stint at the other end, she doesn’t look at her best with the ball at the moment, spearing one down the leg side and narrowly avoiding a wide on the other side with the over-correction. Perry offers too much width once again and Deol frees her arms to splat it over the in-field and away for four. 18th over: India 88-1 (Mandhana 55, Deol 26) Deol breaks the 25 ball boundary drought with a fine sweep off Gardner that bisects the fielders on the square leg boundary. 17th over: India 82-1 (Mandhana 54, Deol 21) Drop! Deol drives back uppishly at a very catchable height to Sutherland but the bowler can’t hang on in her follow through! 16th over: India 78-1 (Mandhana 52, Deol 20) Three runs off Ash Gardner, a Deol sweep for a couple and a Mandhana drive down the ground. We’re into a holding pattern folks. 15th over: India 75-1 (Mandhana 51, Deol 18) A quiet over, just a Mandhana single off Sutherland’s third. 14th over: India 74-1 (Mandhana 50, Deol 18) Ash Gardner comes into the attack for Australia, she’s pocketed Mandhana four times in this format but can’t get the breakthrough this over. Mandhana has the best of the over, driving in-to-out over cover for a classy boundary and then tucking off her pads for a single to bring up her 28th ODI fifty. Well played but job not done, her side need her to convert this and get a big one. 13th over: India 69-1 (Mandhana 45, Deol 18) A meaty edge from Mandhana flies away for four and brings up the fifty partnership between this pair, off 48 balls. Steady going, India aren’t quite at the required rate of six an over but they are thereabouts and are keeping wickets in hand. 12th over: India 62-1 (Mandhana 40, Deol 17) Perry once more, gah, she serves up a juicy full toss with her frist ball and Mandhana doesn’t miss out, panning it away through the leg side for an easy boundary. A single down the ground brings Deol on strike. Two more to India as Deol swivels a pull into the leg side and they come back for two with Phoebe Litchfield doing the chasing in the sweltering Western Australia heat. This partnership is proving a useful one for India. 11th over: India 55-1 (Mandhana 35, Deol 15) Annabel Sutherland, century maker extraordinaire in Australia’s innings, is coming on for a bowl. She nearly gets the wicket too, zipping one off a good length that Deol edges wide of slip and away for four. 10th over: India 48-1 (Mandhana 35, Deol 9) Ellyse Perry replaces Kim Garth. Drop! Perry’s first ball is short and whipped away by Mandhana, the ball flies to Alana King at square leg and bursts through her hands and away to the fence. That was hit hard but was very catchable. King kicks the turf in frustration, she’ll be disappointed with that. Shot! Mandhana hangs back and pulls Perry over midwicket for four. That was almost disdainful, Perry has lost a touch of pace - she hasn’t bowled much in this series either – and the batter looked like she was setting herself to take down anything back of a length. 9th over: India 40-1 (Mandhana 27, Deol 9) Megan Schutt into her fifth over and she could be wilting under the 40 degree heat in Perth, a half volley is pinged away by Deol for four and Mandhana finds the fence too with a drive through cover. 8th over: India 31-1 (Mandhana 23, Deol 5) Mandhana misses out with a flick off the pads but scampers a single. Deol looks a bit scratchy but then stands tall to punch for a couple through cover. 7th over: India 28-1 (Mandhana 22, Deol 3) A single to each batter bookends Schutt’s over. 6th over: India 26-1 (Mandhana 21, Deol 2) Mandhana takes two boundaries off Kim Garth, tickling fine and pulling powerfully through midwicket. 5th over: India 17-1 (Mandhana 13, Deol 1) Harleen Deol is the new batter. She nudges a single into the leg side to get off the mark. Mandhana drops anchor for the rest of the over. Harleen Deol sounds like the name of someone who could have a soulful Christmas Album no? Maybe I’m thinking of Darlene Love? Any excuse. This is one of *the best* Christmas tunes and I won’t hear different. I am all ears for OBO followers faves though. No Cliff, obvs. Stumps splattered by Schutt! Ghosh is defeated by a ball that decks back and keeps a little low. India lose their first. Someone’s going to have to knock the furniture back in once again. 4th over: India 16-0 (Mandhana 13, Ghosh 2) Yes please! Someone in the Indian backroom is obviously reading the OBO and has sent a message to gerronwithit. Mandhana helps a leg side ball from Garth past Beth Mooney behind the stumps for four and then finishes the over with a crunching cut shot for four. Nine off the over. Let’s have it. 3rd over: India 7-0 (Mandhana 5, Ghosh 2) More stump hammering at the other end but from the ground staff rather than the bowler. It’s a top over from ‘The Shooter’ though, just a single off it. India need more than six runs an over, they let the rate get well away from them on Sunday, I’m praying their top order make this interesting and take a few risks. C’mon India, get your Kenny Rogers on… 2nd over: India 6-0 (Mandhana 4, Ghosh 2) There is a delay whilst the stumps are re-adjusted, it looks like the pitch is baked so hard that the stumps aren’t quite knocked in to position. Crikey. It’s a mighty 5 degrees and phlegmy with cloud here in London, FYI. Just two off Garth’s first over, as Ghosh drives into the covers. Sedate start from India, let’s hope they give this a good go. 1st over: India 4-0 (Mandhana 4, Ghosh) Schutt goes short early and is steered away for a controlled couple of runs through the leg side. She then opens the face and glides into the off side for two more. Four off the first over as the sun beats down in Perth. Kim Garth will have the next over with the new nut. Thanks Martin and hello all. Megan Schutt has the white ball in hand, Smriti Mandhana is on strike. Play! Thanks for following along to this point. James Wallace will steer us home as India chase 299 to avoid a series sweep on a deck that looks like a handy one for the batters at least once they’re in. Australia have set India another ominous target after Annabel Sutherland took control of a faltering innings with a superb knock. The all-rounder amassed 110 to guide the recovery before being run out off the second last ball of the innings. By then Sutherland had hit her second ODI ton, the first ODI century by an Australian woman batting at No 5 or lower, as well as her highest score in the format. Captain Tahlia McGrath (56 not out) and Ash Gardner (50) were critical to Australia’s fightback after India pacer Arundhati Reddy had them on the ropes. The 27-year-old shook up the game with four top-order scalps as Australia lost as many wickets for 20 runs before their devastating middle order took charge. Arundhati finished with four for 26 but Deepti Sharma (one for 77) was the only other India bowler to find a breakthrough as the tourists ran out of options. 50th over: Australia 298-6 (McGrath 56, Molineux 2) Sutherland takes command by clobbering a boundary straight over the bowler Sharma’s head, brings up her second ODI ton with a six, then goes over the rope again as Deol drops a catch at long-on and the ball lands over the rope. The centurion is run out trying to edge closer to 300 with one ball remaining as Sophie Molineux skies a slog for two. Annabel Sutherland sacrifices herself at the death when trying to run a second that was never likely. But credit to the gun batter for guiding her side to the brink of 300 then all but giving up her wicket. Sutherland finishes with her highest ODI score. Annabel Sutherland brings up her second ODI ton in the best possible way with a monstrous six over midwicket. The milestone comes from 93 balls with three sixes and nine boundaries. The middle-order powerhouse builds on her history at the Waca! 49th over: Australia 278-5 (Sutherland 93, McGrath 55) McGrath notches a fourth ODI fifty and her first as Australia skipper with a chip to midwicket for two. Another couple from a sweep through square leg off the next ball bring up the 100-run partnership. One more milestone to come, perhaps. 48th over: Australia 271-5 (Sutherland 93, McGrath 48) McGrath and Sutherland are searching for boundaries now but Sharma’s variation in pace and length limits the batters to singles and twos even from a pair of aerial shots. Another costly mis-field on the deep midwicket rope undoes much of the hard work as Sutherland adds a four and moves to within reach of a second ODI ton. 47th over: Australia 261-5 (Sutherland 89, McGrath 42) Arundhati comes on for the last of 10 splendid overs. A mis-field from Sadhu at short fine leg allows Sutherland to pick up a boundary. That might well be 3.5 hours fielding in the heat starting to take its toll but that was harsh on the bowler. Arundhati almost adds another when McGrath swings and misses but the India pacer should be pleased with four top-order batters for 26. 46th over: Australia 255-5 (Sutherland 84, McGrath 41) Spin from both ends as Deepti Sharma is back into the attack. The classy spinner is able to tie down the Australians just as the pair are getting off the leash. Five singles not a bad result against two well-set and potentially destructive batters at this stage. 45th over: Australia 250-5 (Sutherland 82, McGrath 38) The 250 comes up for Australia with five overs remaining and you wouldn’t put it past this pair taking them to 300. McGrath is up and running now picking the gaps in the outfield. With third man free the Australian skipper reverse sweeps a fuller ball to the boundary, then goes about adding easy singles. 44th over: Australia 242-5 (Sutherland 80, McGrath 32) The runs are flowing now! McGrath is a touch fortunate to find a boundary off a thick edge but there is no luck involved as Sutherland rocks back and hammers a pull shot through midwicket for the same result. Fortunate favours the brave once again McGrath steps outside the line on the off-side, slogs away but somehow the inside edge misses leg-stump and trickles away to the rope at fine leg. Titas Sadhu finishes wicketless and goes for 65 runs but has bowled much better than those figures might suggest. 43rd over: Australia 226-5 (Sutherland 75, McGrath 21) Harmanpreet holds back Arundhati’s last over with another change to give Minnu Mani her third over. Australia find five easy singles but the pick of the over is a reverse sweep from McGrath that could hardly have been finer as it finds three runs. That brings up the 50-run partnership from 52 balls. 42nd over: Australia 218-5 (Sutherland 72, McGrath 16) Double change for India with Titas Sadhu thrown the cherry. McGrath is quickly out of her crease and slogs to the leg-side for a hard-earned single. The Australia skipper looks to have added a boundary but an inspired chase in the heat then a dive from Rodrigues saves a couple of runs. 41st over: Australia 214-5 (Sutherland 71, McGrath 13) Arundhati Reddy comes back into the attack with four wickets in her pocket and India needing to strike again before it’s too late. The India pacer immediately has the ball swinging around but Sutherland and McGrath are able to keep her out. Arundhati has one over left and Australia will be pleased to see the back of her. 40th over: Australia 211-5 (Sutherland 70, McGrath 12) Sutherland lights up! 2-4-6-4 to start the over shows little respect for Sharma’s off-spin as the Australian batter adds 17 runs. A pair of shorter deliveries allow Sutherland to rock back and pull for four, but the best of the bunch is in between with a glorious straight drive for six. 39th over: Australia 195-5 (Sutherland 53, McGrath 12) McGrath picks up her first boundary of the innings with a blazing cover drive that is placed perfectly through a gap in the infield. There was a warning shot off the previous delivery that McGrath mis-timed slightly to only pick up two. Looks like the Australia skipper is done with hanging around. 38th over: Australia 187-5 (Sutherland 52, McGrath 5) Flicks and tucks allow the Australian pair to find four singles from another neat Sharma over. It feels like calm before the storm. 37th over: Australia 183-5 (Sutherland 50, McGrath 3) Huge review from India as Renuka Singh finds a way through to Tahlia McGrath’s pads. The Australia skipper played around an angled delivery and was trapped on her crease but the ball was doing a bit too much as replays show it would have missed leg-stump. Sutherland reaches fifty with a punch to mid-off for a very handy knock off 59 balls with four boundaries and a six. 36th over: Australia 180-5 (Sutherland 48, McGrath 2) Deepti Sharma hadn’t done much to trouble Australia until picking up the critical wicket of Gardner but is being treated with full respect now. Sutherland picks up a pair of singles straight down the ground. 35th over: Australia 177-5 (Sutherland 46, McGrath 1) Renuka Singh turns the pressure up with a tidy over as Tahlia McGrath looks to settle in. 34th over: Australia 174-5 (Sutherland 44, McGrath 0) Deepti Sharma picks up a much-needed wicket for India and it is the most-threatening batter in Gardner that makes way. But there is little respite for India as Australia skipper Tahlia McGrath joins Sutherland. Still, India are edging closer to the tail with plenty of overs left. Fifty for Gardner! Then gone. The Australian brings up her sixth ODI half-century off 60 balls with five boundaries but is on her way soon after. Gardner steps back and slices away at a shorter ball but can’t keep it down as Minnu dives forward at point to take a sharp chance. Gardner is yet to score an international ton and with 16 overs still to come an opportunity was perhaps there for the taking. 33rd over: Australia 172-4 (Sutherland 43, Gardner 49) Thwaaack! Sutherland clobbers a boundary over cover. Too full from Thakor as the India bowlers start to run out of ideas. Both batters are picking up singles with ease. Another drinks break as India need to hatch some fresh plans. 32nd over: Australia 164-4 (Sutherland 37, Gardner 47) Australia find runs off very ball of the Sandhu over to keep the run-rate rising. 300 looks on the cards again unless India find a breakthrough. 31st over: Australia 155-4 (Sutherland 34, Gardner 41) Minnu continues with her neat off-spinners that aren’t posing too many problems for Sutherland and Gardner. Both batters are stepping onto their back foot to tuck or chip away singles. Gardner finishes the over by striding out of her crease and slogging to deep midwicket. This is getting away from India again and it will be hard to lift their spirits without a wicket as the sun belts down. 30th over: Australia 148-4 (Sutherland 32, Gardner 36) Everything is falling Gardner’s way now as the Australia swipes outside off and gets a thick edge that races away to the boundary. Sadhu can’t keep the pressure on with a wide ball as the Australian pair share singles. 29th over: Australia 140-4 (Sutherland 30, Gardner 31) Minnu Mani replaces Sharma and Gardner dispatches a first ball loosener to the boundary at backward square leg. That pitched about half way down the track. The of-spinner finds her length with plenty of flight from there. 28th over: Australia 134-4 (Sutherland 29, Gardner 26) DROP! Gardner survives and India are paying the price for grassing three chances. The Australia all-rounder steps down the wicket and clips off her pads but picks out substitute fielder Radha at deep midwicket. Radha has to dive forward while on the move, making it a tough one to grasp, and the ball pops out of her hands as she lands on the ground. 27th over: Australia 131-4 (Sutherland 28, Gardner 24) Australia’s ridiculously deep batting lineup is paying off once again as Sutherland and Gardner took time to get their eye in but now are motoring. Gardner brings up the 50-run partnership with a boundary through square leg. No signs of trouble with the short ball that some attacks try to use against Gardner. 26th over: Australia 124-4 (Sutherland 27, Gardner 18) Gardner follows Sutherland’s lead with the first ball of the over as she pulls a short ball from Thakor to deep square leg. Renuka lost the ball in flight but not sure she would have got to the drop anyway. The fielder recovers to grasp the ball from just off the rope to save two runs. Gardner gets her boundary off the next shorter one. 25th over: Australia 117-4 (Sutherland 27, Gardner 11) Sharma brings spin into the attack for the first time today. Gardner and Sutherland look happy with the change that takes the pace off the ball as they ease ones and twos. That’s until Sutherland dances down the pitch and opens up to clobber a straight drive back over Sharma’s head. One bounce and over the rope to end the over. 24th over: Australia 108-4 (Sutherland 22, Gardner 7) The Australian pair are settling in now. Sutherland clubs a fuller delivery from outside off back between midwicket and mid-on to the boundary. It looks like Arundhati will be given a spell next with Deepti Sharma warming up. 23rd over: Australia 101-4 (Sutherland 17, Gardner 6) First signs of fatigue from Arundhati as the pacer drifts down leg for three wides. Gardner is made to work hard for the third as Mani hits the stumps with the throw from the outfield but the Australian has her bat well across the line. Probably time for Harmanpreet Kaur to hold back Arundhati’s last two overs as Australia move into triple figures. The India quick has four for 18 from eight overs. 22nd over: Australia 96-4 (Sutherland 16, Gardner 5) SIX! And then a dropped catch! Sutherland wallops a six over cover but is almost out next ball. Mani dives to her right but grasses the chance after Sutherland cuts away through point. Sutherland makes her pay with a well-timed drive back past the bowler for four. 21st over: Australia 86-4 (Sutherland 6, Gardner 5) Arundhati Reddy continues for a seventh straight over after the lengthy drinks break with the mercury rising to 41 degrees! Australia will be happy to see her off as they pick up a couple of singles in a cautious over. 20th over: Australia 84-4 (Sutherland 5, Gardner 4) Sutherland sweeps a single through cover and Gardner picks off a drive for one more run as Australia will enjoy the opportunity to reset as both teams head into the rooms for a breather away from the stifling heat. That might work in India’s favour by giving Arundhati Reddy a break after six straight overs. 19th over: Australia 82-4 (Sutherland 4, Gardner 3) Gardner uses up two lives as the right-hander chips straight to mid-on but is dropped by Rodrigues as the India fielder is diving forward. The field was set to trap Gardner on the on-side but the shot fell just short enough to make it difficult for Rodrigues. Arundhati takes everyone else out of the equation with the next delivery that moves a long way in the air at into Gardner’s pads. The finger is raised but a review shows the ball did too much and would have missed leg-stump. Maiden over … but so much more. 18th over: Australia 82-4 (Sutherland 4, Gardner 3) India swing the changes from the opposite end to Arundhati as Renuka Singh takes the cherry. This might be part of a pre-match plan to the ever-dangerous Gardner as the India quick targets the fourth or fifth stump. The Australians do well to find a few singles. 17th over: Australia 79-4 (Sutherland 3, Gardner 1) More success for Arundhati Reddy has flipped this ODI on its head. Mooney is gone to start another superb over from the India pacer who now has four for 11 from five overs. An incredible spell is certainly taking the game up to the usually dominant Australia. This could hardly be a better spell from Arundhati who has ripped through the Australian top order herself in just 4.1 overs. Mooney is the chase a delivery that seams away and nicks off. Another clean catch from Ghosh behind the stumps sends her contemporary on her way as the umpire raises the finger this time. 16th over: Australia 78-3 (Mooney 10, Sutherland 3) Australia start to rebuild as Mooney and Sutherland find simple runs without taking any risks. Mooney chips a single to the leg-side then Sutherland finds space through cover for two more off Sadhu. 15th over: Australia 72-3 (Mooney 8, Sutherland 0) Arundhati has another to lead the India fightback. Perry picks up a couple as Mandhana misfields at mid-on but is then bamboozled by swing and seam. Annabel Sutherland sees out the rest of the over as Australia need to protect wickets. Arundhati has been all over Perry since the Australian star arrived at the crease and finally sends her packing. Perry takes a huge stride to try to eliminate the movement off the seam but plays too straight as the ball beats the outside edge and crashes into the top of off. Where has Arundhati been all series? The seamer has three for 10. 14th over: Australia 70-2 (Perry 2, Mooney 8) Beth Mooney opens up with a scintillating drive to the boundary. No need to run once that shot skips past the infield. Perry is finding the going much tougher as she twice swipes away but is beaten by the movement. The veteran keeps the score ticking over with a chip to the leg side. 13th over: Australia 64-2 (Perry 1, Mooney 3) Arundhati is shaking up this contest and has Perry, of all batters, playing and missing. The India seamer is moving the ball away from the right-hander but gets one to stay straight and almost finds the edge. Perry survives but it’s a maiden over. 12th over: Australia 64-2 (Perry 1, Mooney 3) Mooney is untroubled as the Australian stalwart starts to rebuild the innings after two wickets in the one over. A clip off her hip through square leg picks up a couple. 11th over: Australia 61-2 (Perry 1, Mooney 1) Arundhati breaks up Australia’s opening stand and almost has another with the next delivery. A huge appeal as the ball crashes into new batter Perry’s pads but it swings too far. It was a no-ball anyway and Perry swipes the free-hit straight to Mandhana at mid-on who drops what would have been a non-catch anyway. Arundhati strikes again with Litchfield on strike and both Australia will have to start again with Perry and Mooney. Arundhati has two in the over as Litchfield slashes at a ball outside off that moves away just a touch. A thin edge might have made it a tough chance for Ghosh but the keeper moves across quickly. On-field umpire shakes his head but Ghosh reviews immediately and Litchfield heads for the sheds even before the decision is confirmed. Arundhati gets the much-needed breakthrough for India after impressing since being called into the attack. Voll plays around an inswinger while trying to clip the ball from outside off through mid-on and two stumps going crashing. 10th over: Australia 58-0 (Litchfield 25, Voll 26) Australia fly through the powerplay without loss even as Titas Sadhu puts together a neat over after starting with a wide. India might be rueing the decision to bowl first with the Australia opening pair looking set. 9th over: Australia 57-0 (Litchfield 25, Voll 26) A chance goes begging as Litchfield hangs the bat out away from her body and nicks off. The drop in pace from new bowler Arundhati Reddy leaves India keeper Ghosh standing too deep and the ball drops in front of her gloves. A bounce between the keeper and first slip races away to the rope and the Indians can barely hide their frustration until a big appeal to end the over. Voll is well out of her crease when the ball crashes into her pads, as Arundhati swings it back into the right-hander. India decide not to review and it’s the right call with the ball heading too far down leg. 8th over: Australia 52-0 (Litchfield 20, Voll 26) Voll brings up the pair’s second consecutive 50-run opening partnership with a casual clip through midwicket to the boundary. A direct hit while sneaking a single later in the over goes upstairs for a review but Voll was comfortably over the line by the time she belatedly ground the bat. 7th over: Australia 46-0 (Litchfield 19, Voll 21) Singh has trouble combining the right line with a good length as Voll and find easy singles with a cut through point, a drive through cover and a pull to backward square leg. Litchfield is moving through the gears now as she steps down the wicket to lift a boundary over mid-off then scoops two more to end an ominous over for India. 6th over: Australia 36-0 (Litchfield 12, Voll 19) Titas Sadhu comes into the attack with India searching for an early breakthrough after this pair put on 48 and 130-run stands in the first two ODIs and look like they could get off the leash again. Litchfield leaves one that swings in late and bounces narrowly over off-stump then takes length out of the next delivery as she dances down the pitch to caress the ball over extra cover. 5th over: Australia 30-0 (Litchfield 8, Voll 18) Litchfield reaches at a delivery drifting away and takes a thick edge but the intent in the shot sends the ball over the two slips to the boundary. An early escape for the left-hander amid a solid couple of over from Singh. 4th over: Australia 26-0 (Litchfield 4, Voll 18) Shot of the day so far as Georgia Voll strides forward and drives exquisitely through extra cover. The third-gamer works the crease for a couple more past square leg, as Thakor loses her line and gives away a wide down leg then another three wides on the same side. 3rd over: Australia 12-0 (Litchfield 1, Voll 11) Singh bounces back after a loose opening over as the right-armer gets the ball moving into right-hander Voll and away from left-hander Litchfield. Singh then surprised with one that jags back into Litchfield but somehow misses the inside edge. Just a single to Voll through cover in a tidy over. 2nd over: Australia 11-0 (Litchfield 1, Voll 10) Saima Thakor opens the bowling from the other end with one slip. A much tighter line and length ties Voll down to a single through cover of the last ball of the over. Voll looks entirely comfortably with a feast or famine depending on what the bowler dishes open. 1st over: Australia 10-0 (Litchfield 1, Voll 9) India start with two slips as Singh finds some early swing. Litchfield chips away for an easy single, but Singh gives Voll far too much room outside the off-stump and is punished with back-to-back boundaries through point. The first is momentarily in the air while never quite putting Voll at risk, the next delivery is a little shorter and is cut straight into the turf on its way to the rope. Phoebe Litchfield takes two centres and will face the first ball from Renuka Singh who is at the top of her mark. Let’s play cricket … Phoebe Litchfield is suddenly the elder stateswoman of the Australian opening pair with Georgia Voll to again take on the new ball alongside her at the Waca. The 21-year-olds have playing together since they were in their teens. India: Smriti Mandhana, Harleen Deol, Harmanpreet Kaur (c), Jemimah Rodrigues, Richa Ghosh (wk), Deepti Sharma, Minnu Mani, Saima Thakor, Arundhati Reddy, Renuka Singh Thakur, Titas Sadhu. Arundhati Reddy and Titas Sadhu come into the side with Priya Punia out with a knee injury and young leg-spinner Priya Mishra also making way. Australia: Phoebe Litchfield, Georgia Voll, Ellyse Perry, Beth Mooney (wk), Annabel Sutherland, Ashleigh Gardner, Tahlia McGrath (c), Sophie Molineux, Alana King, Kim Garth, Megan Schutt. Tahlia McGrath reveals that the hosts are unchanged from the second ODI on Sunday. Australia to carry their enviable mix of pace and spin onto the Waca. Tahlia McGrath is happy for Australia to bat first, says she would have elected to do so if the toss went her way. It is a really nice place to bat. A really good challenge for our bowling attack, getting our length right because when you do get that there is a lot on offer, change of venue, slight change of tactics. Really crucial to finish well. We are looking to be ruthless and finish off the series. Harmanpreet Kaur calls “heads” correctly and the tourists want to make first use of the famous bounce of the Waca wicket. We are going to bowl first because of the conditions. I think the pitch will definitely suit us. Completing – or avoiding – a series sweep is not the only lure for Australia and India in this third ODI with the match part of the ongoing ICC Women’s Championship. Australia lead the current multi-year tournament with 32 points from 20 matches ahead of England, but could still be chased down by third-placed India who are seven points behind with seven games remaining. Two points are awarded for a win. Two-time defending champions Australia have four games in hand: this clash with India and the three to come in New Zealand. Young opener Georgia Voll will be given another opportunity to impress in her third ODI against India after an unbeaten half-century on debut was followed by a maiden international ton. The 21-year-old has since been added to the Australia squad to tour New Zealand for three more ODIs with the first to be played next Thursday. Experienced batter Beth Mooney, who will take the gloves again today against India, has liked what she has seen from Voll since the youngster joined the Australia set up. She’s taken to it like a duck to water. She’s certainly done everything she can to make sure she keeps her name up in lights with the Australian selectors. She knows her game pretty well after playing a few years in domestic cricket so I think that’s really helped her come into international cricket. Hello and welcome to live coverage of the third women’s one-day international between Australia and India. The hosts are chasing a clean sweep in the series after making a statement with five-wicket and 122-run victories in the first two matches played in Brisbane. Australia have backed emerging talents Phoebe Litchfield and Georgia Voll to open the innings with great success, while Ellyse Perry added a century in the second match against India as the hosts piled on 371 runs. Megan Schutt set up the win in the first ODI with five for 19, as Annabel Sutherland took four for 39 in the next game if only to demonstrate Australia’s range of options and versatility with the ball. India crashed to their lowest ODI score in 12 years when bowled out for 100 in the opening match but bounced back to find some form in their next outing. Richa Ghosh, Jemimah Rodrigues, Minnu Mani and skipper Harmanpreet Kaur all made strong contributions with the bat even while chasing Australia’s third-highest women’s ODI total. The 20-year-old leg-spinner Priya Mishra has been a joy to watch and hopefully is included in the India XI again today, after taking six scalps across her first four ODIs but bearing the brunt of an Australian onslaught in the second clash. But either way, India will want to show that they can match it with the best ahead of a home Women’s ODI World Cup next year. It’s a typically hot one in Perth today with the temperature already above 35 degrees and expected to hit a high of 39 before a chance of thunderstorms in the late afternoon and evening. First ball at the Waca will be at 12.20pm local time or 3.20pm AEDT. I’ll guide us through the first innings, and let James Wallace take the reins for the second dig. Team and toss news will be coming shortly. In the meantime, get in touch with any comments, questions, thoughts and predictions – shoot me an email or find me @martinpegan on Bluesky or X. Let’s get into it!