Title: TV tonight: the mind-boggling search for the world’s oldest DNA 
Author: Unknown
Source: guardian
Published: 2024-12-11T06:20:38Z
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2024/dec/11/tv-tonight-the-mind-boggling-search-for-the-worlds-oldest-dna
----------------------------------------
The Hunt for the Oldest DNA 9pm, BBC Four “We will never get dinosaur DNA,” says one scientist in this fascinating documentary. But even allowing for this disappointingly defeatist attitude, the process surrounding DNA is becoming increasingly mind-boggling, to the point where it now seems that the genetic secrets of our deep past could help humanity navigate the future. The story is engagingly told, mainly thanks to the charismatic biologist Eske Willerslev for whom this field has become a labour of love. Phil Harrison Swiped: The School that Banned Smartphones 8pm, Channel 4 What happens to developing brains when they are deprived of smartphones? It is a question many parents would love to know the answer to. This intriguing two-parter sees Emma and Matt Willis joining forces with the Stanway school in Colchester to observe and participate in a 21-day experiment in digital deprivation. PH Shetland 9pm, BBC One Season nine of the sombre Scottish cop drama reaches its finale, with Tosh (Alison O’Donnell) and Ruth Calder (Ashley Jensen) determined to refocus their faltering double-murder investigation. New evidence suggests that cagey drifter Lisa (Tara Lee) could shine a light on what happened at the croft. Graeme Virtue Guy Martin: Arctic Warrior 9pm, Channel 4 Does Guy Martin have what it takes to be a commando? You may struggle to care about the answer to this question but this two-part doc isn’t entirely without intrigue, as Martin attempts the harsh training tasks completed by Royal Marines (ice-water dunks, wilderness camps) and explores, superficially, the geopolitics that make the Arctic Circle so strategically critical. PH My Brilliant Friend 9pm, Sky Atlantic It is a double bill packed with pain this week, as Lenù finds a man to console her after she learns more about Nino’s affairs. Just as life is looking up with her book selling well, she is threatened with legal action so teams up with Lila to write an exposé on the Solaras. Hannah Verdier Breath of Fire 9pm, Sky Documentaries The final part of this gripping series exploring the life of “the Kim Kardashian of the yoga world”, Katie Griggs, AKA Guru Jagat. Tonight, the volume of troubling stories about Griggs increases while her views – which encompass the risible QAnon conspiracy theory – become more extreme. PH Film choices Sugarcane (Emily Kassie, Julian Brave NoiseCat, 2024), 10pm, National Geographic The dark, dark history of abuse – and more – of Indigenous children by Catholic priests and nuns in a mission school in Canada gets a harsh light shone on it in Julian Brave NoiseCat and Emily Kassie’s devastating documentary. It follows investigators looking into unmarked graves at a former school on First Nation land in British Columbia, and also tells the grim stories of the survivors, including Brave NoiseCat’s own father. PM Justin Trudeau and the pope make appearances as the horrific truth resonates round the world and down the generations. Simon Wardell The Sacrifice (Andrei Tarkovsky, 1986), 1am, Film4 Andrei Tarkovsky’s final film is a typically esoteric but beautifully shot delve into the human condition, punctuated by intense dreamlike scenes. Set in rural Sweden where retired actor Alexander is celebrating his birthday, it has obvious nods to Bergman and Chekhov as he, his family and friends exchange memories and worries. But then news comes of a nuclear war, and a desperate Alexander makes an offer to God to give up everything to save the lives of the others. SW Live sport Champions League Football Arsenal v Monaco, 7pm, TNT Sports 1 From the Emirates Stadium.