Title: Lucrative tax breaks will be ‘vital’ in PNG team’s bid to attract top NRL players 
Author: Unknown
Source: guardian
Published: 2024-12-11T01:34:24Z
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2024/dec/11/nrl-pacific-expansion-png-team-tax-breaks
----------------------------------------
Tax concessions and safe accommodation loom as non-negotiables for players as an NRL team in Papua New Guinea plans its entry the competition 2028, but the opportunity to have a social impact has emerged as a potential secret weapon for recruitment. The licence for the expansion franchise will be confirmed on Thursday, triggering a frenzy of activity among players and agents excited by the prospect of more than 50 new NRL and NRLW contracts. Former Kangaroo David Shillington, who played several times in Port Moresby, said the club must target those who care about the PNG community. “Those players that want to be a part of something really special, and know that their giftedness playing football, the hard work they put into building their career, is actually going to provide a massive social impact at the same time.” The club is the central part of a $600m, 10-year investment by the Australian government into development and diplomacy centred on sport in the Pacific, but its success hinges on the new franchise’s ability to attract high-end talent. Rugby League Players Association chief executive Clint Newton said players need to be consulted both in the start-up phase and regularly in subsequent years given the “unique” nature of the proposed team, and discussions must include both the Australian and PNG government. “There’s no doubt there are some obstacles that we’ve got to go over, but I certainly don’t think it’s as complex as landing on the moon,” he said, citing high-performance standards at the club, player accommodation and the availability of schools and medical services as crucial. “I think we can get there and it is going to produce long-lasting and generational impact.” Tax concessions are expected to be offered to players as a sweetener funded by the PNG government, which is also spending around $40m each year in the lead-up to 2028 on facilities and pathways. A secure complex similar to those used by Australia’s Department of Foreign Affairs to house workers and their families in Port Moresby is set to be built. Shillington, who now works as a player mentor, said tax breaks will be “vital”, as even the best recruiters can find it hard to convince players to join expansion teams. “We saw when the Dolphins came in [in 2023] they had super coach Wayne Bennett there recruiting people,” he said. “But even he really struggled with recruitment in that first year or two, and that held them back a lot.” Former NRL player and now accredited agent Scott Sattler said the lifestyle will be decisive in whether players move, and for some it might not be dissimilar to working in a remote mine. “The best way I would look at selling it would be, it’s just like a Fifo [fly in, fly out] job,” he said. “You go and spend two to three years earning more money than you’ve ever earned in rugby league, possible tax breaks, and you do it for a period of time, and you save as much of that money as possible for your young family’s future.” Although there are over 10,000 Australians in Papua New Guinea at any one time, recent violence and instability has heightened concerns among expats. Sattler said the club had to demonstrate safety and security to potential recruits. “First and foremost, it’s going to be where are the players going to be located and can you assure their safety,” he said. Melbourne five-eighth Cam Munster – who comes off contract at the end of 2027 – said last week he wasn’t aware of how the PNG bid was coming together, but players will be reluctant to commit until they had seen the living and working conditions. “They’ll go over there and have a look at the facilities as a group, as players, and then make the decision,” he said. He said the team will be “massive” for fans in PNG, and their passion is another drawcard. “I’m sure there’ll be some players that want to play for PNG.”