Title: Celtic 0-3 Real Madrid, Chelsea 6-1 Twente: Women’s Champions League – as it happened
Author: Unknown
Source: guardian
Published: 2024-12-11T22:18:15Z
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2024/dec/11/celtic-v-real-madrid-chelsea-v-twente-womens-champions-league-live
----------------------------------------
Sophie Downey’s match report from Stamford Bridge is in, so I’ll wrap things up there. Thanks for joining! Chelsea had that game done in the first half, courtesy of some pretty sloppy work at the back from Twente – that’s 14 wins from 14 in the WSL and WCL this season for the Blues. Real Madrid had it slightly tougher against Celtic … but the Scottish side remain pointless in Group B. Another round awaits, with first place in the group still up for grabs. Chelsea 6-1 Twente Celtic 0-3 Real Madrid Plenty of goals but, admittedly, little drama. The two sides already through to the quarter-finals were thoroughly dominant. It’s a well-worked corner that wraps this game up. Madrid play it short before Sheila Garcia whips the ball into the area, with Alba Redondo placing her header just right to make it three. … and another. A corner comes in from the right, Olivia Clark – sandwiched by two of her teammates – parries the ball away and Ève Périsset is there to seize the opportunity, opting for power as she smashes in Chelsea’s sixth on the night. 77 min: Celtic 0-2 Real Madrid Celtic very nearly inject some drama into this game, with Saoirse Noonan striking inside the area … but Misa Rodríguez dives low to her right to make a strong save. A second was always coming and it arrives after a delicious cross from the right by Naomie Feller. She hangs it up at the far post, with Signe Bruun heading in from a yard out. 70 min: Chelsea 5-1 Twente Chelsea continue to hassle Twente, giving it their all for a sixth. They work it nicely from right to left before Guro Reiten forces a decent low save from Olivia Clark. 59 min: Celtic 0-1 Real Madrid Over at New Douglas Park, Naomie Feller nearly accidentally scores a second for Real Madrid, her cross from the right clipping the top of the bar. The sub strikes! A Chelsea corner comes in, is cleared away and Maika Hamano dinks it back into the area. Twente try and play the offside trap but Nüsken sneaks away to glance a header into the bottom corner. I reckon Twente have been hard done there – she may well have been just off but there’s no VAR to overrule. Chelsea can afford to mix things up, making two changes at half-time: Ramírez is off after her screamer, with Nathalie Björn making way too. Sjoeke Nüsken and Guro Reiten are on. Both matches are back underway. It’s half-time in both games, one far more eventful than the other. Chelsea, after a misstep with the conceded penalty, have been ruthless in pretty much nabbing another win this season. Celtic, on the other hand, have yet to fire a shot against Real Madrid. It’s carnage at the Bridge! Twente continue to make errors playing out from the back. This time it’s Clark, the keeper, passing to the onrushing Erin Cuthbert, who drives into the area and shoots from the right. The ball loops off Clark, high into the air … Knol rushes back to try and clear but ends up volleying the ball into her own net. This’ll be the goal of the night. Aggie Beever-Jones wins possession on the left, with the ball trickling to Mayra Ramírez, who is more than 30 yards away from the goal. Seeing Olivia Clark off her line, she decides to hit it first time and nails the effort into the net, over the keeper’s head. Brilliant. That didn’t take long. Oriane Jean-François drives into the area after receiving on the left and lets loose, with a deflection off Anna Knol helping her beat the keeper. This is a ripper! Signe Bruun receives the ball from just outside the D, shifts on to her right foot, loads up and thumps the ball into the top left corner. The assist is from Linda Caicedo, who pulled off a well-read interception before playing to Bruun. The visitors are level! It comes from a penalty after Charlotte Hulst is dragged down by Maika Hamano inside the area – rather unnecessary challenge, that. Hamano gets a yellow and Kayleigh van Dooren steps up, slotting into the bottom left corner. 23 min: Chelsea 1-0 Twente The hosts, I should add, could have gone 2-0 up a little earlier in this half, with Erin Cuthbert blasting a volley high from not far out after a fine cross from the right by Ève Périsset. 17 min: Celtic 0-0 Real Madrid Celtic’s Morgan Cross is down on the ground getting treatment after a nasty aerial clash. Madrid have had much of the ball so far, but neither goal has been tested. Aston Villa are in action in the League Cup, by the way, having parted ways with Robert de Pauw earlier today. They’re 2-1 up at half-time against Charlton, courtesy of goals from Rachel Daly and Ebony Salmon. Chelsea are up and running early. Twente give away the ball at the back with Mayra Ramírez intercepting and playing in Catarina Macario. Macario feeds it back, with a wayward pass allowing Twente to retreat inside their area. But Macario’s shot is blocked back to her before she expertly lobs the keeper with a fine volley. And we’re off in both of the Group B fixtures. Celtic are still waiting for their first points … they kick things off against Real Madrid. I hope Group A haven’t taken all our goals. There’s been some real madness at Wolfsburg, where the substitute Sveindis Jonsdottir has scored four (!) goals in a 6-1 win over Roma to secure her side’s passage into the quarters. Lyon have won 6-0 in Istanbul against Galatasaray to make it five wins from five in this year’s WCL. Tom has also written today’s Moving the Goalposts piece, on the ambitions of Hera United, aiming to make history as the first independent women’s club in the Eredivisie. Away from the WCL for a moment … Tom Garry and Suzanne Wrack have this report on Robert de Pauw leaving Aston Villa. Robert de Pauw’s departure from his role as Aston Villa’s women’s team manager on Wednesday came amid concerns regarding the way he had allegedly spoken to his players, including about their appearance, the Guardian has been told. It is understood concerns were raised internally about the Dutchman’s allegedly unprofessional remarks and that this was looked into by the club. De Pauw and Aston Villa were contacted for a response. Chelsea make seven changes from the side that started in the 4-2 win over Brighton on the weekend, with Millie Bright, Nathalie Björn, Erin Cuthbert and Aggie Beever-Jones remaining in the lineup. Twente go the other way, with just one change after their 4-0 win over Heerenveen on Saturday: the forward Nikée van Dijk makes the XI. Celtic: Daugherty, Lawton, Clark, Hayes, Barclais, McGregor, Cross, Cavanagh, Gallacher, Ashworth-Clifford, Agnew Subs: Rodgers, Richardson, Ross, Smith, Signe Carstens, Mathilde Carstens, Kerner, Noonan, Bruna, Luana, McAneny, Logan Real Madrid: Misa, Hernández, Gálvez, Méndez, Carmona, Toletti, Weir, Angeldahl, Feller, Bruun, Caicedo Subs: Chavas, López, Abelleira, Antônia, Redondo, García, Møller, Camacho, Navarro, Del Castillo Chelsea: Musovic, Périsset, Björn, Bright, Charles, Cuthbert, Jean-François, Hamano, Macário, Beever-Jones, Ramírez Subs: Hampton, Cox, Nüsken, Reiten, Lawrence, Kaptein, Rytting Kaneryd, Bronze, Brown Twente: Clark, Vliek, Knol, Carleer, Tuin, Van Dooren, Van Ginkel, Peddemors, Hulst, Ravensbergen, Van Dijk Subs: De Jong, Vissers, Everaerts, Diekman, Andradottir, Te Brake, Proost, Verdaasdonk, Galic, Van der Vegt, Ivens. Hello, hello, hello and welcome to tonight’s WCL clockwatch. While the two Group A games have already kicked off – Galatasaray v Lyon and Wolfsburg v Roma – we’re focusing on the two Group B fixtures: Real Madrid are off to Celtic while Chelsea host Twente. Admittedly, there’s not a great deal of jeopardy here, with Chelsea and Madrid both through to the quarter-finals. But there’s still a battle for first place in the group, and Sonia Bompastor’s side are still carrying a 100% record across competitions – a crack at the perfect season continues. Here’s to GOAL! GOAL! GOAL! throughout the evening.