Title: Emaciated zombie in 28 Years Later is not Cillian Murphy, sources confirm
Author: Unknown
Source: guardian
Published: 2024-12-11T16:32:40Z
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/film/2024/dec/11/emaciated-zombie-in-28-years-later-is-not-cillian-murphy-sources-confirm
----------------------------------------
When the trailer for Danny Boyle’s belated zombie sequel 28 Years Later released on Tuesday, the less-than-rosy-cheeked appearance of the first film’s star, Cillian Murphy, did not escape comment. A scene in which a strikingly skinny member of the undead suddenly rears up, naked, behind new star Jodie Comer was taken as confirmation of rumours that Murphy had returned for an appearance in the new film. Reaction on X was broadly positive about Murphy’s apparent cameo, with one user suggesting the actor had “that perfect eerie vibe to pull off an infected” while another wrote: “Oh god finally! Was not expecting Cillian Murphy to come back like that! I’m shook!!!” Murphy, 48, lost a considerable amount of weight for his role as J Robert Oppenheimer, but his cheekbones were a calling card long before that Oscar-winning performance. Yet the Guardian can reveal that the actor playing “Emaciated Infected” in the film, due for release in June 2025, is not Murphy but rather newcomer Angus Neill. Neill, an art dealer specialising in old masters, was talent-spotted by Boyle, who was much struck by his distinctive looks. Neill also works as a model, with his professional profile suggesting he has a 28-inch waist. “Danny told me he’d always had me in mind for the role,” said Neill. “So we met up, hit it off, and I agreed to take part. “On set he has an extraordinary ability to hypnotise you, and working with him on the film was a very, very intense experience.” The Guardian has approached Sony Pictures, who are distributing the film, for comment. Murphy played a bicycle courier in the original 2002 film, 28 Days Later, who wakes from a coma to find that a highly contagious virus has led to the breakdown of society and a land roamed by zombies and desperate survivors. His character survived that film but did not appear in the 2007 sequel, 28 Weeks Later. However, the actor has repeatedly expressed eagerness to be involved in a third film. Speaking to the Independent in January, Murphy said: “I would be there in a flash. I made two movies with both of those guys [Boyle and writer Alex Garland], and I would love to work with them again. Of course, I’m there.” Alongside Comer and Neill, the new film features Aaron Taylor-Johnson, Ralph Fiennes and Jack O’Connell. Murphy may also yet be featured.