Title: Sean ‘Diddy’ Combs accused of drugging and raping three men in lawsuits
Author: Unknown
Source: guardian
Published: 2024-12-12T17:30:31Z
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2024/dec/12/sean-diddy-combs-men-rape-lawsuit
----------------------------------------
Three more accusers have filed sexual assault lawsuits against Sean “Diddy” Combs alleging they were drugged with spiked drinks and then raped by the rapper and music mogul in incidents dating as recently as 2022. The new lawsuits, first reported by TMZ, were filed separately through a New York lawyer by anonymous plaintiffs. The suits allege that the plaintiffs went to parties with Combs, in two cases in hotels and the third at his mansion in the Hamptons, where he gave them alcoholic drinks after which drinking they quickly passed out and came to when he was raping them. Combs has denied all the allegations and pleaded not guilty. His lawyers told TMZ that the three new lawsuits were “full of lies”. They added: “We will prove them false and seek sanctions against every unethical lawyer who filed fictional claims against him.” The plaintiffs are all male and identified in court documents only as John Doe, according to NBC News. The assaults alleged in the filings occurred between 2019 and 2022. One plaintiff alleged that his attack was filmed and he was subsequently given $2,500 in cash by the man who operated the camera. In a second filing, a man alleges that Combs’s associates threatened him into remaining silent. NBC News reports that the third plaintiff alleges that in the summer of 2020 he was taken by “associates” of Combs from the company he founded, Bad Boy Records, to his East Hamptons residence. At the party the man began feeling ill and passed out. Combs and his associates then took turns in sexually assaulting and raping him, the lawsuit alleges. The men’s lawyer, Thomas Giuffra, a New York-based trial lawyer specialising in abuse cases, told the Guardian that the three separate lawsuits described a “shockingly similar pattern”. “Combs would drug the people, they would wake up while he was raping them, and afterwards they would be rushed out the door, receive threats from people who worked for Mr Combs, and be frightened into silence.” Giuffra said that same pattern “happened on every single one of these cases”. He added that he had received about 60 calls regarding cases against Combs and that “these are the three that we are filing at this point”. The new lawsuits add to the mountain of accusations against Combs, who since September has been held in custody at the Metropolitan Detention Center in Brooklyn on charges of racketeering conspiracy, sex trafficking and transportation for prostitution. He already faces sexual assault accusations from more than two dozen civil lawsuits brought on behalf of men and women claiming he abused them. Last month, a New York judge denied Combs bail for the third time, describing him as a “serious risk” for witness tampering. • Information and support for anyone affected by rape or sexual abuse issues is available from the following organisations. In the US, Rainn offers support on 800-656-4673. In the UK, Rape Crisis offers support on 0808 500 2222. In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800 737 732). Other international helplines can be found at ibiblio.org/rcip/internl.html