Title: New Zealand opposition parties back Māori plea to King Charles 
Author: Unknown
Source: guardian
Published: 2024-12-12T05:17:18Z
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2024/dec/12/new-zealand-maori-treaty-of-waitangi-letter-king-charles-government-opposition-support
----------------------------------------
New Zealand’s opposition parties have thrown their support behind a letter appealing to King Charles III to intervene in New Zealand’s politics amid tensions over the government’s policies for Māori. The Guardian on Wednesday revealed the National Iwi Chairs forum – a collective of more than 80 tribal leaders – had written a letter to the king, asking him “to ensure that the [New Zealand] government does not diminish the crown’s honour” over what they consider ongoing breaches of the crown’s promises made to Māori in the Treaty of Waitangi, New Zealand’s founding document. “It just shows you how serious the situation here is, because you have … Māori under attack almost weekly from this government,” said Labour Party MP Willie Jackson, adding the letter was powerful even if King Charles does not respond. “Its embarrassing for this government,” he said, “Having Māori leadership going to the king to say how unreasonable this government has been.” Te Pāti Māori (the Māori party) co-leader Debbie Ngarewa-Packer said iwi (tribes) have long tried to be diplomatic but now the situation was “so serious it was compromising the integrity of the crown”. To write a letter to the king was an “extreme step” and shouldn’t be taken lightly, she said. “This high-level appeal is exactly where the discussions should be happening and while the king may not choose to get into politics, to threaten the [treaty] is way outside of the political realm.” Since taking office last year, New Zealand’s rightwing coalition government’s policy direction has sparked the biggest ever protest over Māori rights, mass meetings of Māori leaders and condemnation from the Waitangi Tribunal, an institution that investigates breaches of the Treaty of Waitangi. The treaty is an agreement signed in 1840 between more than 500 Māori chiefs and the British crown and is instrumental in upholding Māori rights. The rationale behind many of the government’s proposals is to end “race-based” policies, tackle crime and reduce bureaucracy. The coalition has said it is committed to improving outcomes for Māori and all New Zealanders. But critics fear its policies, including rollbacks of the use of Māori language in public services, the dismantling of an institution designed to remedy inequities in health, and the introduction of a controversial bill that seeks to radically alter the way the treaty is interpreted undermine Māori rights, igniting anti-Māori rhetoric and eroding the Māori relationship with the crown. Speaking to media on Thursday, the prime minister, Christopher Luxon, said the forum was free to write to King Charles III. “I’m sure many people write to King Charles and feel free to do so, but I acknowledge, as I’ve said before: the treaty principles bill, there are strong feelings on both sides.” The bill does not have widespread support and is unlikely to become law. However, its introduction has prompted anger from many who believe it is creating division and undermining the treaty. New Zealand is a constitutional monarchy and Charles is the head of state, who – through his representative, the governor-general – acts on the advice of the government. Buckingham Palace told the Guardian this was a matter for the New Zealand government but that the king is kept informed of all matters in the country. Green party MP Teanau Tuiono said it was disheartening iwi were having to remind the crown of its commitments, made under the treaty. “We have a government that is dragging us backwards and disrupting the fabric of our society,” he said. “This letter is an entirely appropriate call for support from King Charles to do something about this institution.”