Title: TV tonight: Linford Christie runs for the hills
Author: Unknown
Source: guardian
Published: 2024-12-12T07:13:25Z
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2024/dec/12/tv-tonight-linford-christie-runs-for-the-hills
----------------------------------------
Celebrity Escape to the Country 8pm, BBC One With the help of his daughter Briannah and property expert Alistair Appleton, it’s time for athlete Linford Christie to make a dash for the countryside. Linford has been a city boy all his life so can rural tranquility compete with the buzz of the town? During the course of this special, the Christies take a tour of the Chilterns and enjoy outdoor dining at the more bucolic end of the Thames. Inside the Tower of London 8pm, Channel 5 “Never trust a raven,” warns their master Barney, but the feisty little fellas are the stars of the show as they attempt to nip the public and steal their sandwiches. In the background, preparations for the Kking’s coronation anniversary are ongoing, with plans for a special gun salute. Smoggie Queens 9pm, BBC Three The uproarious Middlesbrough-set drag sitcom continues; tonight, Stewart is in the spotlight. It’s his birthday but he doesn’t want a big fuss in case his grandmother or work colleagues find out he’s gay. But if staying unobtrusive is his priority, maybe he needs a new set of friends for the day? The Day of the Jackal 9pm, Sky Atlantic Trigger warning: the cold-blooded assassin thriller wraps up its first season with the Jackal (Eddie Redmayne) exposed and on the run across Europe. Will his bumbling English posho act help him evade capture? Meanwhile, in London, aggrieved agent Bianca (Lashana Lynch) is discreetly asked to take on a killer contract of her own. Dalgliesh 9pm, Channel 5 Another mystery for poetic detective Adam Dalgliesh (Bertie Carvel), as this mild-mannered drama based on the novels of PD James continues. This time, we’re in rural Essex where a love triangle (inevitably, at a village fete) appears to have led to murder. But will Dalgliesh see things differently? Question Time 10.40pm, BBC One The QT team are in London’s leafy suburb of Beckenham, birthplace of Bob Monkhouse and David Bowie’s performing career – though it’s doubtful either will come up. Instead, Fiona Bruce will present a panel fielding audience questions on topical matters, such as discord at No 10 and Putin’s next move. Film choice The Lady from Shanghai (Orson Welles, 1947), 9.05am, Talking Pictures TV It is one of several, potentially classic Orson Welles films that suffered at the hands of others, but his 1947 film noir still has enough traces of his incorrigible genius to be worth your time. That’s partly down to Welles casting his wife at the time, Rita Hayworth, as the femme fatale, then cutting and peroxiding her famous red hair. The story is a pacy if convoluted yarn about an Irish sailor, Michael (Welles), who agrees to fake the death of the business partner of a rich attorney and his alluring young wife (Hayworth). Naturally, things go fatally wrong.