Title: Conservative US commentator Candace Owens granted NZ visa after government intervention
Author: Unknown
Source: guardian
Published: 2024-12-12T04:49:59Z
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2024/dec/12/candace-owens-granted-nz-visa-after-government-intervention-far-right-us-commentator-ntwnfb
----------------------------------------
The controversial US commentator Candace Owens has been granted a visa to enter New Zealand after the government stepped in and reversed Immigration New Zealand’s earlier rejection of her application. The far-right influencer and podcast host, who has advanced conspiracy theories and antisemitic rhetoric, including minimising Nazi medical experiments in concentration camps, was granted a visa after appealing to Chris Penk, the associate minister for immigration. A spokesperson from Penk’s office confirmed to the Guardian on Thursday the minister had exercised his discretion to approve her application. “The minister made his decision after considering representations made to him, including the importance of free speech,” the spokesperson said. Immigration New Zealand originally declined her visa application in November, after Owens was denied entry to Australia in October. Under New Zealand’s Immigration Act, an individual may not be granted a visa if they have been excluded from another country. “Subsequently, Ms Owens requested intervention from the associate minister of immigration to exercise his discretion and grant her a visa,” Penk’s office said. The Free Speech Union, which lobbied the government to grant Owens a visa, praised the associate minister’s decision. “It was appalling to see Immigration New Zealand follow in the footsteps of Australia and deny Owens’ entry on spurious grounds,” said Jonathan Ayling, its chief executive. “It’s a dangerous situation to be in when the state begins to cherrypick which voices we hear from.” But multiple groups in New Zealand had previously urged immigration officials to deny Owens’ visa, including the Holocaust Centre of New Zealand. Chairperson Deborah Hart told the NZ Herald in October that Owens had “wacky ideas” and an “unhealthy preoccupation with Jews”. Hart said Owens also had “awful things to say about the gay community and Muslims.” Young Labour published an open letter saying Owens spreads divisive and hate-filled rhetoric, which posed a threat to New Zealand. Across the ditch, Australia’s immigration minister, Tony Burke, said Owens’ visa had been denied due to her “capacity to incite discord”. “From downplaying the impact of the Holocaust with comments about [notorious Nazi doctor Josef] Mengele through to claims that Muslims started slavery, Candace Owens has the capacity to incite discord in almost every direction,” Burke said in October. “Australia’s national interest is best served when Candace Owens is somewhere else.”