Title: Comedian Duncan Norvelle, famed for ‘chase me’ catchphrase, dies aged 66
Author: Unknown
Source: guardian
Published: 2024-12-12T21:48:24Z
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2024/dec/12/comedian-duncan-norvelle-famed-for-chase-me-catchphrase-dies-aged-66
----------------------------------------
The comedian Duncan Norvelle, whose catchphrase “chase me” made him a staple of British Saturday night TV in the 1980s, has died aged 66. He had suffered from a chest infection and sepsis. His partner Lynn Trevallion said: “His type of comedy doesn’t happen anymore, he’s probably last of the legends of true variety comedy, so many have passed now. “He was a gentle comedian, never swore on stage. Sir Ken Dodd loved Duncan, because he said he was like him, ‘a good, clean act’, and he invited Duncan on his 80th birthday to be the entertainment for him.” A clip on YouTube of Norvelle appearing on the impenetrable 80s quiz show 3-2-1 gives a flavour of his act. He sidles onstage wearing a mullet and blue tuxedo jacket, then flirtatiously offers the carnation in his buttonhole to a bearded man in the front row of the audience, inviting him to “chase me”. Though his act played on the gay stereotypes of the time, Norvelle was heterosexual. He was part of a generation of comics, including Cannon and Ball and Jim Davidson, who became TV stars after cutting their teeth in working men’s clubs and variety shows. They were eventually replaced in the mainstream by a more left-leaning, anarchic and political aware crop of comics initially known as “alternative comedians” including Ben Elton and French and Saunders. Born in Horton, in Leicestershire, Norvelle rose to standup performances in venues including the London Palladium and appeared on shows TV such as Wogan, The Bob Monkhouse Show and The Keith Harris Show. In 1985, he hosted the pilot episode for a dating show called It’s a Hoot!, which later became Blind Date presented by Cilla Black. “In the pilot, Duncan hadn’t been able to get the logistics, but Cilla was great at all the army-like manoeuvres – turn left here, look into that camera, introduce this now,” Alan Boyd, head of entertainment at London Weekend Television, told the Guardian. Norvelle had suffered a stroke in 2012 which left him partially paralysed, though he continued to perform. “He got back on stage after his stroke and just proved to everyone that he could still get a standing ovation every single time he did a show,” Trevallion said. “And he did loads and loads of shows after his stroke because they said he quite possibly would never walk or talk properly, and he could talk perfectly.” Davidson sent his “heartfelt condolences” to Norvelle’s family, adding: “Rest in peace Duncan. You were, and always will be, a proper comedian.” Comedian Jimmy Cricket, another star of the era, said: “Duncan was a charismatic performer who thrilled audiences up and down the country with his style of humour and hilarious impressions, he was also a man of indomitable spirit! RIP old friend.” Gary Bushell, the former TV critic of the Sun, wrote: “So sorry to hear we have lost loveable comic Duncan Norvelle. Angels are chasing him now.”