Title: The toast of Christmas: 10 of the best Australian sparkling wines, from budget to bougie
Author: Unknown
Source: guardian
Published: 2024-12-12T14:00:21Z
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/food/2024/dec/13/best-australian-sparkling-wines-christmas-lunch-dinner-drinks-guide
----------------------------------------
At this time of year it’s hard to resist the lure of champagne at your local bottle-o. While Australians are among the largest consumers of champagne globally – providing stiff competition for our local sparkling wine industry – there is a surfeit of exceptional Australian tipples that are worth discovering too. From the mildly funky to the slightly bougie, here are 10 bottles of Australian fizz to get you through the festive period. Under $20 The Nimble Vintner, NV Prosecco, Murray-Darling, $15 As the label suggests, winemaker Richard van Ruth is nimble when it comes to the wines he produces. Sourcing grapes from regions across Australia, his prosecco is his most popular drop. Fruity, delicate and vibrant, it’s the perfect aperitif on its own or a support act in a spritz of your choosing. If pairing with your meal, stick to light flavours that won’t overpower: white meat, fish, a green salad or a bowl of nuts with a few cold cuts and breadsticks. Under $30 Oakridge, NV Ovata Chardonnay Pinot Noir, Yarra Valley, Victoria, $26 Oakridge is known for producing stellar drops, often at premium price points. Ovata is their first foray into affordable, traditional-method sparkling wine, in collaboration with winemaker Teresa Heuzenroeder. Aged 18 months on lees, this wine is made from a blend of chardonnay and pinot noir and offers up aromas of stone fruit, apples and curd. For what you’re getting, this wine is well priced – particularly from a producer that’s known for bringing home award after award. Athletes of Wine, Alto! Alto! 2022 Col Fondo Sparkling Trebbiano, Glenrowan, Victoria, $28 Think of it as a prosecco, with added interest. Instead of using glera grapes, which are synonymous with col fondo (a style of prosecco in which the leesy sediment is left in the bottle), the guys at Athletes of Wine use trebbiano. Bright and youthful, with a little complexity thanks to nine months on lees, it features notes of red apple, grilled nuts, pear and lemon. With a touch of herbal tea and a lovely foaming fizz to boot, it’s super fresh and far too easy to drink. Sommelier turned winemaker Liam O’Brien has street cred in spades, with over 20 years’ experience in the hospitality sector, including as the wine and beverage manager for Melbourne institution Cutler &amp; Co. Sign up for the fun stuff with our rundown of must-reads, pop culture and tips for the weekend, every Saturday morning Under $40 Howard Park, NV Petit Jeté, Margaret River, Western Australia, $33 This easy-drinking fizz has been a favourite quaffer of mine for years. If you’re partial to a blanc de blancs, you’ll find everything you’re looking for right here. Fresh, mouthwatering acidity with flavours of stone fruit, citrus and a splattering of biscuit, it’s a racy, drink-now style built for food. I like it with fried chicken, creamy cheeses, fish and chips by the beach or potato chips in the back yard with mates. Renzaglia Wines, 2023 Rural Method di Renzo, Orange, NSW, $35 I’ve always adored the Renzaglia family: their wines are exceptional value and of a consistently high standard. Made from 50% chardonnay and 50% cabernet sauvignon, this rural-method sparkling sports a gorgeous magenta hue and suits someone interested in more natural-style wines without needing to go too far down the funky line. A refreshing drop, with red berries and a savoury edge. $50 or under Yabby Lake, 2019 Single Vineyard Cuvée Nina, Mornington Peninsula, Victoria, $45 I grew up on the Mornington Peninsula, and with my folks still down there, I remain fairly engaged with the region and its producers. Yabby Lake has really surprised me in recent years, with this wine leading the charge. Made by traditional method, it spent several years on lees imparting texture and complexity. It’s got great length too, which means the flavour of the wine lingers in your mouth long after you’ve swallowed. Quite a delicate drop, it’s dry and displays lovely citrus and stone fruit flavours with moreish acidity. Steels Gate, 2019 Blanc de Blancs, Yarra Valley, Victoria, $50 Matthew Davis and Brad Atkins are the most gorgeous couple and it has been a delight watching this wine develop through several disgorgements. Having spent 4.5 years on lees, their 2019 vintage has hit a sweet spot. Made from 100% hand-picked chardonnay, time has allowed this wine to develop a luscious, creamy mouthfeel. Crisp, dry and citrusy, it’s a wine made with a great deal of love and patience. Reminiscent of lemon meringue tart, with a honeyed beeswax-like finish, it’s simply delicious. The boys suggest serving it with chilli crab, and I don’t disagree. Over $50 House of Arras, 1801 NV Brut Elite Cuvée, Tasmania, $68 Winemaker Ed Carr is an absolute powerhouse, and while he and I share the same surname, sadly we are not related. I only wish I had access to an endless supply of his wines. Recently named sparkling winemaker of the year at the International Wine Challenge, he’s one of Australia’s best, too. A lot of time goes into ageing many of his sparkling wines, with his signature drop carrying a hefty price tag of almost $300. While still on the pricier side, this nifty number sits at the lower end of their range. A blend of pinot noir, chardonnay and pinot meunier, it sports stone fruits and citrus on the nose, with intense red fruits, lychee and dried citrus on the palate. Coming from Tasmania, there is only one way to drink this wine: with a dozen oysters. Bellebonne, 2021 Vintage Rosé, Tasmania, $90 Often referred to as “Australia’s sparkling queen”, Natalie Fryar produces some of the best sparkling wine in the country. Made from 100% pinot noir, don’t be deterred by the price as you’ll get a lot more bang for your buck than from most champagnes at this price. From the nose to the palate it’s bloody delicious: turkish delight, buttery pastry, toasted nuts, juicy seasonal strawberries and raspberries – it’s got it all. The fruit that comes out of Tasmania is prime for sparkling wine, and this is yet another example of why the state’s bubbles are gaining considerable recognition on the international stage. This is a special-occasion wine and will pair beautifully with a Christmas Day seafood meal. Sparkling red Krinklewood, 2020 ‘The Gypsy’ Sparkling Shiraz, McLaren Vale, South Australia, $55 For me, there’s nothing better than cracking open a sparkling shiraz with dessert on Christmas Day: it feels refreshing after a big meal and pairs superbly with sweets. This particular example stood out to me this year. A balance of bright-red fruit with layers of luscious dark plum and cherry, it’s rich and complex while retaining a liveliness on the palate. A little savoury, a splattering of spice and a finish I would call off-dry, it’s the perfect finisher. Aged for three years on lees, it’s a wine made with patience and attention to detail. Now, what to eat with it? Anything chocolate would be delightful, or perhaps a pavlova smothered in seasonal fruit, or – if you’re anything like me – a very large helping of plum pudding with homemade custard.