Title: Wolves close in on Vítor Pereira after sacking Gary O’Neil as head coach
Author: Unknown
Source: guardian
Published: 2024-12-15T22:11:41Z
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/2024/dec/15/wolves-sack-gary-oneil-as-head-coach
----------------------------------------
Wolves are optimistic about appointing the Portuguese coach Vítor Pereira as their next head coach after Gary O’Neil became the third Premier League manager to be sacked this season. Pereira, in charge of Al-Shabab in the Saudi Pro League, has won domestic titles in Greece, Portugal and China. Wolves are hopeful of making a swift appointment after deciding to dismiss O’Neil hours after Saturday’s stoppage-time home defeat against Ipswich. The 56-year-old Pereira is understood to be keen on the switch, with Wolves expected to trigger his release clause. O’Neil, who was appointed at the start of last season, leaves Wolves 19th in the Premier League after four consecutive defeats. They sit five points behind Leicester in 17th place, who they face in the league on Sunday. They have the top flight’s worst defensive record, conceding 40 goals. “We’re very grateful to Gary for all of his effort, dedication and hard work during his time at the club, and we wish him and his team the best of luck for the future,” said the Wolves chairman, Jeff Shi, in a statement posted on the club’s website. Wolves gave O’Neil a new contract in August and were reluctant to make a change. Identifying the right replacement has been an issue for the 41-year-old. Graham Potter, the former Brighton and Chelsea manager, rebuffed their interest in him last month while David Moyes, the former West Ham manager, and West Brom’s Carlos Corberán were also considered. Wolves have been keen to avoid a repeat of the uncertainty that followed the sacking of Bruno Lage in October 2022. It took them another month to bring in Julen Lopetegui, who quit before the start of last season, citing dissatisfaction with the club’s transfer strategy. Wolves replaced Lopetegui with O’Neil and finished 14th after recording wins over Chelsea, Tottenham and Manchester City. Yet a lack of investment in the squad has come back to bite them. More than £200m has been raised through sales in recent years, with Matheus Nunes, Rúben Neves, Conor Coady and Raúl Jiménez departing, and the talent drain continued when Maximilian Kilman and Pedro Neto left last summer. O’Neil has had to pick up the pieces. Supporters have grown disillusioned with his tactics since the FA Cup quarter-final defeat by Coventry in March. Results have deteriorated and morale has plummeted. Ipswich’s stoppage-time winner was the 20th time that Wolves have conceded from a set piece this season. There were angry scenes at full time, as the left-back Rayan Aït-Nouri had to be pulled away from an argument with the centre-back Craig Dawson. Mario Lemina had been stripped of the captaincy after clashing with O’Neil’s assistant, Shaun Derry, at the end of last Monday’s 2-1 defeat at West Ham.