Title: Russell Martin sacked by Southampton after humbling Tottenham defeat
Author: Unknown
Source: guardian
Published: 2024-12-15T22:50:26Z
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/2024/dec/15/russell-martin-sacked-southampton-after-defeat-tottenham
----------------------------------------
Russell Martin has been sacked as Southampton manager after the Premier League’s bottom club’s heavy 5-0 defeat by Tottenham proved the final act of his reign. Having guided the club’s return to the top division via last season’s Championship playoffs, beating Leeds in the final, Martin has struggled since Southampton’s promotion. He leaves Saints bottom of the Premier League on five points from 16 matches. On Sunday, as his team conceded five first-half goals, Saints fans sang songs criticising Martin’s style of play, and St Mary’s emptied as supporters voted with their feet, many leaving the stadium after Pape Sarr scored Tottenham’s fourth goal in the 25th minute. A club statement conveyed the news that became inevitable during that first-half performance. It read: ”We can confirm that we have taken the difficult decision to part ways with our men’s first team manager, Russell Martin.” The statement continued: “Going into the start of the season, we all knew the challenges that we would face this year as we readjusted to life in the top flight, competing in the best and most competitive league in the world. However, the reality of our situation is clear. The board have supported Russell and his staff and been open and transparent regarding our expectations. We have all been on the same page in recognising the urgency of needing results to improve.” In a post-match interview, Martin, 38, asked if he expected the fans to get their wish of his departure, said: “Not a clue, mate. Not a clue. You’re asking the wrong person. I’ve done nothing but fight in my life and my career, so, we’ll keep working and keep fighting until I am told I am not going to any more.” Martin’s commitment to an open and attacking style, asking defenders to bring the ball forward, has malfunctioned repeatedly in the higher echelon, but the former Swansea manager, who joined Saints in the summer of 2023, remained unrepentant about his approach. Southampton confirmed that their under-21s manager, Simon Rusk, will step up on an interim basis while they select a permanent replacement. Before the news was announced, Martin said he understood fans’ reactions. “When I put my ego into it as a manager, it hurts a lot because we work so hard every single day, but it’s not personal. I don’t know them, they don’t know me. It’s a criticism of the job I am doing, I understand.”