Title: South Africa v England: women’s Test cricket international, day one – as it happened
Author: Unknown
Source: guardian
Published: 2024-12-15T15:23:07Z
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2024/dec/15/south-africa-england-women-test-cricket-international-day-one-live
----------------------------------------
So that is us. Thanks for your company through an excellent day of Test-match cricketTM; join us for more tomorrow, and check back soon for our report. But otherwise, peace out. 6th over: South Africa 17-0 (Wolvaardt 8, Bosch 1) Two slips, short leg, silly mid-off and short leg … but Ecclestone’s loosener is poor, Bosch missing out on free runs when offered a drag-down. Naturally, the bowling improves thereafter, Bosch just about digging out a couple before playing forward to end a banger of a day. SA fought back superbly after tea and, though England will feel they’re still in control, they’re not in the dominant position that looked likely. 5th over: South Africa 17-0 (Wolvaardt 8, Bosch 6) Lovely from Bosch, on tippy-toes to flow Foiler’s first delivery through cover for four; SA are negotiating this period well but they’ll be well aware that Ecclestone is readying herself to close out the day. A single follows, Bosch turning to leg but opting not to take another run when MacDonald-Gay first botches her pick-up, then hurls to no one. SA are nearly there, but here comes Ecclestone… 4th over: South Africa 12-0 (Wolvaardt 8, Bosch 1) I wonder if Knight is tempted to give Ecclestone a go before the close; on the one hand, her quicks look menacing, on the other, the best bowler in the world with a new nut seems like a decent ruse. And as I type, Bell overpitches, allowing Wolvaardt to drive through cover, then she jams down the bat to dig out a yorker, the ball squirting away for for more. Bell then flings another down leg side, Filer doing brilliantly on the fine leg fence to save two as they run two, and I think that may be her final over, this one yielding 10. 3rd over: South Africa 2-0 (Wolvaardt 0, Bosch 1) Three slips for Filer as she charges in again; after a dot and a leg-side-wide bouncer, she finds her line and length, almost inducing the edge when Bosch looks to drive. Bowling fuller now, she tucks the batter up, then tries a bouncer … but it’s too high. Much better over, and she’ll get one more go at forcing a breakthrough before the close. 2nd over: South Africa 1-0 (Wolvaardt 0, Bosch 1) Bell needs two deliveries to find her groove, forcing Bosch back before a twizzle around the corner sets her and her team away. Both bowlers look threatening. 1st over: South Africa 0-0 (Wolvaardt 0, Bosch 0) Miserable loosener from Filer, a full toss outside off, so Wolvaardt ignores; second ball, she’s forced to defend. Filer is into this now, finding decent line with some helpful bounce before a wide one completes her maiden. Righto, off we go again! England batted beautifully up front, but won’t have expected to lose so many wickets post-tea; SA bowled with guts, enterprise and skill, especially towards the end of the day. The match looked likely to get away from them, but they’re still right in it – theoretically, at least. That makes sense. There probably weren’t many more runs out there for them, so Heather Knight decides it makes more sense to get six overs at the South African openers tonight. 92nd over: England 395-9 (Filer 0, Bell 0) I guess we can say this is a decent track, offering plenty to both spinners and quicks, but with plenty there to excite the batters too. This has been a terrific fightback from South Africa and Hlubi goes wide of the crease, jags one in, and Ecclestone, backing away, can’t get bat on it, the ball careering into middle, two-thirds of the way up. 92nd over: England 395-8 (Ecclestone 21, Filer 0) It’s Hlubi taking the new ball for the other end and her loosener is not good, Ecclestone tickling four to fine leg. 91st over: England 391-8 (Ecclestone 201, Filer 0) A nasty outswinger is too good for Filer. Brilliant over from Kapp. It was coming. After working over the batter with swing and seam, a straight one goes straight through McDonald-Gay and that wicket is no more than Kapp deserves. 91st over: England 391-7 (Ecclestone 20, MacDonald-Gay 1) Eeesh, as Kapp prepares to bowl with the new meteorite, the umpires take a light reading, and are they going off? The batters look headed to the dressing room but they’re just getting a drink off and a chat with Sophia Dunkley. Ten overs remain in the day as Kapp springs in, hitting the seam and spiriting one away, beating MacDonald-Gay outside off. And have a look! Again, she hits a length and moves the ball away, the batter unable to respond, then she plays and misses at an in-ducker; this is lovely bowling. 90th over: England 391-7 (Ecclestone 20, MacDonald-Gay 1) Luus has put in a phenomenal shift today and she sends down four dots, then MacDonald-Gay takes a single to midwicket and Ecclestone one to deep backward square. And finally, the new ball arrives…. 89th over: England 390-7 (Ecclestone 20, MacDonald-Gay 1) Mlaba delivers a drag-down half-tracker and Ecclestone doesn’t miss out, humping through cover for four, then offering width, she again goes to the fence, this time at point via cut. A single then follows, and surely Mlaba will now get a rest? 88th over: England 381-7 (Ecclestone 11, MacDonald-Gay 1) MacDonald-Gay scores her first Test run, twizzling around the corner for one, and I wonder if Heather Knight is toying with the idea of a declaration, getting her quicks a dart at SA before the close. Meantime, England add a single and a leg bye. 87th over: England 378-7 (Ecclestone 10, MacDonald-Gay 0) Mlaba strays short and wide, offering Ecclestone the release-boundary she needs, forced through cover-point. These are the only runs from the over, and surely SA will take the new ball at some point soon, going at the tail in the knowledge they can always return to their spinners if necessary. 86th over: England 374-7 (Ecclestone 6, MacDonald-Gay 0) Ecclestone takes two to long leg then one down the ground, the only runs from the over. 85th over: England 371-7 (Ecclestone 3, MacDonald-Gay 0) Further excellence from Mlaba, beating MacDonald-Gay with turn and bounce; the catch goes down but there was no edge. Ah, and that’s drinks. Mlaba and Luus have earnt the arse out of theirs. Jones looks to force the issue, hitting over the top … to be caught at mid-off. Four for Mlaba, who’s bowled with so much enterprise and aggression since tea. 85th over: England 371-6 (Jones 39, Ecclestone 3) Ecclestone gets away with a low edge past slip; SA put in another, only for Mlaba to bowl away from it, short and leg-side, Jones taking one to midwicket. 84th over: England 368-6 (Jones 39, Ecclestone 0) England do their best to replicate dismissals, Jones almost playing on, then Ecclestone almost run out when Luus gets fingertips on Jones’ drive; this time, though, the batter was in her ground. Maiden. 83rd over: England 368-6 (Jones 39, Ecclestone 0) Mlaba moves one away from Eccleestone, who won’t mind seeing that at all, least of all on day one. SA have come back really well in this session. Mlaba is enjoying this, extracting a touch more bounce that forces Dean backwards to play into the ground … and the ball leaps into the stumps! 82nd over: England 366-5 (Jones 39, Dean 6) Since tea, Mlaba has attracted all the attention and rightly so, but Luus has kept at it and kept the score down, this latest over – her 20th – yielding just two singles. 81st over: England 364-5 (Jones 38, Dean 5) SA continue with the old ball, but I’d be keen to see what dip and bounce Mlaba can get with a new one. In the meantime, though, she rushes through another tight one, a single to Jones the only scoring shot. 80th over: England 363-5 (Jones 37, Dean 5) The new ball is due after this over, but there’s no sign of South African quicks getting loose. Meantime, Dean gets off the mark with as single to leg then, after Jones responds with one of her own, she moves to leg and glances adroitly around the corner for four. 79th over: England 357-5 (Jones 36, Dean 0) SA are into the tail now, and if they could somehow rustle England out for around 400 that’ll constitute a massive win. This was the only way they were going to get her. Jones drives down the ground, Mlaba gets fingernails to the ball, it doesn’t deviate and hits the stumps, Sciver-Brunt run out backing up. So a tremendous innings comes to an end in unfortunate circumstances, but really, what a player she is. 78th over: England 355-4 (Sciver-Brunt 127, Jones 35) Luus must also be exhausted and England milk her, a two and two ones keeping the score ticking over. It’s a while since a ball beat the bat. 77th over: England 351-4 (Sciver-Brunt 124, Jones 34) Mlaba needs a break but she continues, Jones monstering her first ball through cover for four and her third through deep backward square for four more; that’s eight off three and she’s enjoying herself now. The thing is, SA’s bowlers aren’t used to the rigours or demands of Tests, and after two more singles, it feels fair to say that England are back in full control, 10 off the over and the partnership between these two now 52. 76th over: England 341-4 (Sciver-Brunt 123, Jones 25) Two singles and the partnership is into the forties, then Sciver-Brunt turns into the on side and they sneak two. 75th over: England 337-4 (Sciver-Brunt 120, Jones 24) Ach, four dots, then a short wide one and Jones isn’t the type to miss out, stretching to flay through cover for four. As long as there are regular release balls, there won’t be pressure, and much as Laura Woolvardt will want Mlaba to bowl through, a rest now might have her back firing a little bit later. 74th over: England 333-4 (Sciver-Brunt 120, Jones 20) Luus hits Sciver-Brunt on the pad, the ball going down, then a single into the on-side is matched by Jones whacking to midwicket. Those are the only runs from the over and, though England aren’t scoring at the same clip as before, if these two are batting in the last hour, you’d still fear for SA. 73rd over: England 331-4 (Sciver-Brunt 119, Jones 19) Yup, Mlaba is tiring, and she allows Jones to wait for one that sits up … in order to clout through cover for four, the only runs from the over. 72nd over: England 327-4 (Sciver-Brunt 119, Jones 15) Four singles, then Sciver-Brunt is offered width, and she doesn’t need asking twice, gliding four through cover. She’s not dominating as she was before tea, but such is the cadence of a Test knock; she’s still in control. 71st over: England 319-4 (Sciver-Brunt 113, Jones 13) Mlaba might be tiring a little. Her 11th over leaves her blowing at the end of it, and she’s not ripping the ball quite as hard I don’t think. A single to each batter, though, is a decent return, because she’s got a jaffa in her if she can only keep a lid on things until the next one. 70th over: England 316-4 (Sciver-Brunt 112, Jones 12) Sciver-Brunt takes a single to square leg, then Jones muscles one more around the corner. The batters don’t look in much trouble, but the rate has slowed. 69th over: England 315-4 (Sciver-Brunt 111, Jones 11) Sekhukhune seems to have hurt her ankle fielding in that last over, so she takes some treatment on the fence; I think she spiked herself. Back in the middle, Sciver-Brunt sends Mlaba’s first ball to cover for one, the only run from the over. This is much better from SA. 68th over: England 314-4 (Sciver-Brunt 110, Jones 11) Sciver-Brunt misses a sweep and there’s a strangulated appeal for lb, then offered absolute filth of a full toss, she clobbers down the ground for four. Two singles follow, and that’s a better over for England, seven from it. 67th over: England 307-4 (Sciver-Brunt 108, Jones 6) This time, though, Mlaba can’t find the flight and bounce that’s been beating the bat, so must settle for the first maiden in I don’t know how long. Since tea, England have mustered just two boundaries, which evidences a big improvement from the hosts. 66th over: England 307-4 (Sciver-Brunt 108, Jones 6) Sciver-Brunt nurdles behind and they take a single to the keeper; no, in fact it’s a leg-bye. Jones then drives for one, but really these Luus overs are just setting up the next from Mlaba. 65th over: England 305-4 (Sciver-Brunt 108, Jones 5) Again, Mlaba finds dip and bounce, beating Jones, who retorts with a whack down the ground, the bowler just unable to pull off a spectacular c&amp;b. England’s spinners will fancy the turn this track is offering now. 64th over: England 301-4 (Sciver-Brunt 108, Jones 1) Sciver-Brunt taps to cover, raising England’s 300 in the process, and a further single follows, Jones off the mark to deep midwicket, then Mlaba dives to cut off one that looks set to provide more runs; she’s the main character out there, for now at least. 63rd over: England 299-4 (Sciver-Brunt 107, Jones 0) Has Mlaba found something? She sends down another beauty first up to Jones, landing on a length and ripping across Jones, whose soft-handed edge drops just short of slip. It’s a procession! And this is a delectable delivery, dipping, gripping and bouncing across Wyatt-Hodge, who edges … and Jafta has to sort out her footwork at the same time as hanging on, just. 62nd over: England 299-3 (Sciver-Brunt 107, Wyatt-Hodge 14) Luus continues, her front-on style looking eminently hittable. But this isn’t a bad over, Wyatt-Hodge’s push to cover the only run from it. 61st over: England 298-3 (Sciver-Brunt 107, Wyatt-Hodge 13) Mlaba to continue after tea and Sciver-Brunt shoves her second delivery to cover for one. Wyatt-Hodge then adds one more, before NSB turns around the corner for four. Four balls, six runs, and this is not the start SA will have planned; ultimately, they don’t have the players to back up their intentions. We go again… We’ll be back in 15 or so, so to tide you over until then, given we’re in South Africa, here’s my pick of the year’s Afrobeats and amapiano. 60th over: England 292-3 (Sciver-Brunt 102, Wyatt-Hodge 12) Luus will bowl the final over before the interval and it’s relatively tidy, a single and a leg bye completing a session in which England scored 189 off 33 overs; rrrridiculous. Already, this match looks set. 59th over: England 290-3 (Sciver-Brunt 102, Wyatt-Hodge 11) A single to Sciver-Brunt and two to Wyatt-Hodge, then Mlaba drops short, giving Wyatt-Hodge all the time she needs to thread through cover for four, the minor pressure England were under released. A two and a one, both to Wyatt-Hodge, follow; that’s 10 off the over, and we’ll have one more before tea. 58th over: England 280-3 (Sciver-Brunt 101, Wyatt-Hodge 2) SA have, for the first time in a while, put a bit of a break on the scoring; this latest Luus over yields just one, Sciver-Brunt to midwicket yet again. 57th over: England 279-3 (Sciver-Brunt 100, Wyatt-Hodge 2) Five dots from Mlaba, then Wyatt-Hodge gets off the mark with a sweep around the corner for two. Mlaba tosses one up, Bouchier throws hands, and Luus leaps to hold a decent snaffle over her head. SA needed that as much as anyone has ever needed anything, but what a knock that was. 55th over: England 277-2 (Bouchier 126, Sciver-Brunt 100) On the hoardings around the ground, there’s an advert for Woza Nawe, which of course puts to mind the absolute banger below. A single to each batter keeps England motoring, then Sciver-Brunt has time to go backwards, forwards then backwards again, turning Luus around the corner and that’s her century! Off 97 balls! She’s the first woman ever to hit 100 Test runs off fewer than 100 balls. 55th over: England 272-2 (Bouchier 124, Sciver-Brunt 97) Mlaba, who’s been off getting treatment on a groin issue, returns having taken some tap in her first spell. England will, you imagine want to put her under further pressure – it’s not beyond the realms they score 500 today – and shonuff, as I type Bouchier lofts over mid-off for four. This is almost painful to watch. 54th over: England 266-2 (Bouchier 119, Sciver-Brunt 96) A single to Sciver-Brunt, then three dots before Bouchier chases one down leg, making sure to get a piece of it and adding yet another four through fine leg. That was not the best delivery Luus has bowled. 53rd over: England 261-2 (Bouchier 115, Sciver-Brunt 95) A single to Sciver-Brunt, then Bouchier chases a bouncer, the ball dropping just short of Tryon at deep square. And it’s been a while – in context – so after a dot, she again flows four through midwicket because she can, then adds another one. A Test-match ton is almost hers. 52nd over: England 254-2 (Bouchier 114, Sciver-Brunt 89) Eeesh, Sciver-Brunt sweeps Luus’ first ball to the fence at deep backward square, where Sekhukhune should cut off but cannot, England’s last 100 runs have come seven an over, and when they add two further singles, they raise their 150 partnership; it’s come off 148 deliveries. Another single, this time to Sciver-Brunt, completes the over, and this is almost cruel now. 51st over: England 247-2 (Bouchier 113, Sciver-Brunt 83) When it’s against you, it’s against you. Another good ball from De Klerk, fourth-stump line, and Sciver-Brunt edges, missing her own leg-stump by fibres … and adding four. It’s really windy out there now, which I guess suggests rain might be coming, and after a single, Bouchier flogs just past the dive of mid off for four. A wide follows, and that’s 10 off the over already; I say already because, as I type, England’s centurion has time to wait for one that sits up and she pulls to the fence at long leg, where the fielding is unawesome. Thirteen off the over. 50th over: England 233-2 (Bouchier 105, Sciver-Brunt 78) Bouchier is content to let Sciver-Brunt take the initiative which makes sense – she’s been out there in the heat a good few hours now. She takes a single to mid off, Sciver-Brunt does likewise to long off, they then add one more each, and Luus just doesn’t seem to have anything to trouble these. England are in total control. 49th over: England 229-2 (Bouchier 103, Sciver-Brunt 76) SA turn to pace, De Klerk returning and soon finding herself turned towards the midwicket fence, because Sciver-Brunt has again pulled to it. De Klerk, though, responds with a nut, moving off the seam away from the bat; that’s the first time a delivery has been so good in a fair while. Some potential comfort, though: there’s an 80%, 90% and 70% chance of precipitation over the next three hours. 48th over: England 225-2 (Bouchier 103, Sciver-Brunt 72) Another quieter over, just the five singles from it, which tells you all you need to know about the kind of day SA are enduring. 47th over: England 220-2 (Bouchier 101, Sciver-Brunt 69) A quieter over, Sciver-Brunt taking a single down the ground. SA will take any comfort they can. 46th over: England 219-2 (Bouchier 101, Sciver-Brunt 68) I don’t even know what to tell you: Sciver-Brunt ruthlessly thrashes Tryon, who’s having a trying day, through her favourite midwicket area for four, tales a single to cover … and Bouchier opens shoulders, disbursing a gorgeous late cut through third for four. That’s her debut ton and we see her dad on his feet and applauding. Admittedly I was in the discotheque last evening, but my eyeballs might be lightly sweating. What a moment! What a knock! Sky should depute someone to chat to him immediately. 45th over: England 210-2 (Bouchier 97, Sciver-Brunt 63) Sciver-Brunt flicks to midwicket and they race through for a brace, then add one more. SA badly need something, problem being they’ve already looked everywhere and found nowt. 44th over: England 207-2 (Bouchier 97, Sciver-Brunt 60) Tryon is getting tried on, Sciver-Brunt pulling a drag-down through midwicket for four. There’s then some chuckling as she gets the sightscreen where she wants it, before a dot and four more, this time wide of mid on. England are having their way with SA, and after a further single, Bouchier edges fo mo, her first runs in a few overs and she’s now within one hit of a ton in her first Test. 43rd over: England 194-2 (Bouchier 93, Sciver-Brunt 51) Luus comes into the attack post-drinks and this is a daunting challenge; Sciver-Brunt has a look at one, then takes a big step forward and hauls around the corner to the fence. That’s her 50, off 46 deliveries, and she looks impregnable out there. What a cricketer she is! She then twizzles the last ball of the over to mid on, so retains the strike. Thanks Taha and good morning everyone. On the one hand, England are cutting loose and South Africa are in trouble; on the other, add two wickets to where we are now… 42nd over: England 189-2 (Bouchier 93, Sciver-Brunt 46) Tryon is loose, and Sciver-Brunt is happy to cash in. It’s seven off the over, with this partnership at 86 off just 87. And that’ll be all from me, with Daniel Harris stepping up. 41st over: England 182-2 (Bouchier 93, Sciver-Brunt 39) And the carnage resumes, with Bouchier moving to 93 with a pumping hit down the ground … for six! 40th over: England 171-2 (Bouchier 87, Sciver-Brunt 34) Nearly a chance as Bouchier advances against the spin of Chloe Tryon, but fails to clear mid-on. The ball bounces just short of the fielder, allowing the opener an escape. 39th over: England 169-2 (Bouchier 86, Sciver-Brunt 33) Some respite for South Africa, with just one conceded. 38th over: England 168-2 (Bouchier 85, Sciver-Brunt 33) Sciver-Brunt’s power is hurting Mlaba, who concedes two more boundaries, with England going at sixes across the last 10 overs. Dominant work from the visitors since losing Knight after the break. 37th over: England 156-2 (Bouchier 84, Sciver-Brunt 22) Bouchier is just having the greatest time out there. She punches and pulls away Dercksen for a couple more boundaries, but the best closes the over: a straight drive that nearly flattens the bowler. 36th over: England 144-2 (Bouchier 72, Sciver-Brunt 22) Spin enters the game, courtesy of Nonkululeko Mlaba’s left-arm tweak. Sciver-Brunt attacks early, driving through the off side for four before pulling a long hop to go to 20. There’s turn off the pitch with the next delivery, but Sciver-Brunt watches it closely to tidily dab it behind point. 35th over: England 134-2 (Bouchier 72, Sciver-Brunt 12) Dercksen has taken on Hlubi’s enforcer role, but her bouncer to Bouchier is swatted away for yet another boundary. An outside-edge from the final ball of the over doesn’t carry to the slip cordon. 34th over: England 127-2 (Bouchier 66, Sciver-Brunt 11) Sekhukhune is going stump-to-stump but that benefits Bouchier when she goes a touch too straight; for the gazillionth time today, the opener discards the ball off her pads to the ropes for four. 33rd over: England 123-2 (Bouchier 62, Sciver-Brunt 11) Dercksen returns to produce a maiden against Sciver-Brunt. 32nd over: England 123-2 (Bouchier 62, Sciver-Brunt 11) Bouchier swings wonderfully over extra cover for four … and is pinned on the pads next ball by Sekhukhune! It’s a huge appeal but the finger stays down. A very, very decent shout, though the ball could’ve been sliding down leg. Again, a reminder that there’s no DRS in this game. 31st over: England 118-2 (Bouchier 58, Sciver-Brunt 10) Hlubi is trying to bring some short-ball havoc to the contest, but Bouchier does brilliantly to ride the bounce with the final ball of the over, guiding behind point for four. 30th over: England 113-2 (Bouchier 54, Sciver-Brunt 9) South Africa seem to be getting a bit of a squeeze going … until Sciver-Brunt shows off her authority, as one of the best in the world, clipping through the leg side for four. She nearly offers point a catch with the next ball, but it drops short. 29th over: England 108-2 (Bouchier 54, Sciver-Brunt 4) The lively Hlubi takes up the action from the other end, conceding just one. 28th over: England 107-2 (Bouchier 54, Sciver-Brunt 4) Nat Sciver-Brunt is gifted a misfield off her first ball, a fumble at mid-on allowing the straight drive to run away for four. Sekhuhkhune is making things happen, though. And we’re back, with Tumi Sekhukhune bowling … and she strikes with the third ball after the break! She gets a bit of nip back into the right-hander and the front pad is struck, the decision pretty simple. Such is the way of the modern world, the players in this Test match are currently being auctioned off for the Women’s Premier League in India. Bouchier and Knight have gone unsold, while Nadine de Klerk has joined Mumbai Indians for 30 lakh (£28,000). 27th over: England 103-1 (Knight 20, Bouchier 54) Hlubi thunders in for the final over of the session, but the immaculate Bouchier is unfazed. It’s England’s morning, courtesy of the opener’s half-century. 26th over: England 103-1 (Knight 20, Bouchier 54) Tumi Sekhukhune is into the attack and Bouchier swings across the line … all the way for six! Marizanne Kapp was on the rope, waiting there for the grab, but it’s the England debutant who gets to celebrate, having hit some cracking strokes in this morning session. 25th over: England 96-1 (Knight 20, Bouchier 47) Heather Knight drives Hlubi through cover before the fast bowler delivers a decent retort, thudding the ball into the front pad; a potential inside-edge tones down the appeal for lbw. 24th over: England 91-1 (Knight 16, Bouchier 47) De Klerk continues to do a decent controlling job without threatening to take a wicket, bowling her second maiden. 23rd over: England 91-1 (Knight 16, Bouchier 47) Hlubi, who got rid of Beaumont, is back on and she’ll have a crack at the short stuff. A fuller ball nearly does for Knight at the end of the over, a bit of nip finding the inside edge, but the ball misses the stumps and runs to the ropes. 22nd over: England 84-1 (Knight 12, Bouchier 44) Knight collects a couple off De Klerk, hoovering up and spitting back out anything on her pads. 21st over: England 82-1 (Knight 10, Bouchier 44) Kapp runs through her set with little drama. I’m still a bit surprised by South Africa’s lack of bouncers since their success with the first wicket. 20th over: England 82-1 (Knight 10, Bouchier 44) De Klerk is hitting the same areas, hanging the ball outside off stump, testing Knight’s patience. But then comes the misstep, a ball on the pads that Knight whips away for four. De Klerk is angry with herself, knowing full well that she’s ruined her earlier good work. 19th over: England 78-1 (Knight 6, Bouchier 44) Kapp returns, perhaps for a bouncer barrage? No, she’s still keen on going full with a touch of outswing. Bouchier and Knight exchange singles. 18th over: England 76-1 (Knight 5, Bouchier 43) Nadine de Klerk strings together the dots with a tight line outside off, though Knight looks untroubled as she lays forward her defence. 17th over: England 76-1 (Knight 5, Bouchier 43) A quieter over than usual, with Knight clipping behind square on the leg side for one. 16th over: England 75-1 (Knight 4, Bouchier 43) Bouchier is batting like a dream here. The latest in the highlights reel is a leg-side clip off De Klerk that takes her into the 40s. 15th over: England 71-1 (Knight 4, Bouchier 39) South Africa go up in appeal, thinking that Heather Knight has gloved down the leg side off a Dercksen bouncer – I don’t think so and neither does the umpire. Knight is up and running with a drive through the covers for four. The England skipper has a fine Test record, averaging 42 with a best of 168* against Australia in January 2022. That was some game: 14th over: England 67-1 (Knight 0, Bouchier 39) Hlubi is off after a lengthy opening spell, with Nadine de Klerk a new victim of Bouchier’s driving masterclass. The over closes with an on-drive for four. Time for drinks. 13th over: England 62-1 (Knight 0, Bouchier 35) Bouchier plays the shot of the morning, off Dercksen, leaning into a drive through point for four, barely putting any force into it, all timing and class. Hlubi sends down the first bumper of the day, but it’s outside off so Beaumont can easily leave it aside. But the bouncer-ploy eventually works! The final ball of the over is pulled to catching midwicket, with Sune Luus leaping to her left to hold on. Beaumont, who was very, very lucky to survive an lbw appeal in the first over, is finally on her way. 12th over: England 53-1 (Bouchier 27) 11th over: England 51-0 (Beaumont 19, Bouchier 27) Bouchier flicks off the pads … and a horrible misfield at fine leg, through the fielder’s legs, gifts a boundary. A wonderful straight drive brings Bouchier her fifth four of the day, this game just a little too easy for her at the moment. 10th over: England 43-0 (Beaumont 19, Bouchier 19) Hlubi goes wide of off stump … and Beaumont throws the bat at it, driving behind point for four. South Africa just can’t seem to string together a couple of properly tight overs. 9th over: England 38-0 (Beaumont 15, Bouchier 18) Kapp gets a breather, replaced by Annerie Dercksen. She sends down her outswingers and is on the money, delivering a much-needed maiden for South Africa. 8th over: England 38-0 (Beaumont 15, Bouchier 18) Hlubi, bowling from wide on the crease, gets Beaumont to play and miss outside off. Then comes an lbw appeal, with Beaumont offering no shot as the ball flicks the trousers. But the ball was probably still missing off stump. Hlubi has really found her groove now, as she gets a nip-backer to stay low against Bouchier, threatening to cut her in half. But Bouchier wins the final battle, clipping through midwicket to end the over with a boundary. 7th over: England 33-0 (Beaumont 14, Bouchier 14) Bouchier punches Kapp off the back foot through cover-point for a couple; the opener is seeing it nicely, untroubled on her red-ball bow. 6th over: England 29-0 (Beaumont 14, Bouchier 10) Hlubi begins by bowling too straight, the ball angling down the leg side, before re-routing towards the off-stump channel. Bouchier inside-edges the ball for one. 5th over: England 28-0 (Beaumont 14, Bouchier 9) A fine Kapp over is slightly ruined by the final ball, with Beaumont driving through the covers for four. 4th over: England 24-0 (Beaumont 10, Bouchier 9) It’s scorching in Bloemfontein as Hlubi finds her areas after an iffy first over, testing out Bouchier’s forward defence. There’s a mix-up between the two batters as Bouchier clips to square leg (yes-no etc); they decide against the run and the throw at the striker’s stumps is wayward anyway. 3rd over: England 20-0 (Beaumont 10, Bouchier 9) Kapp continues to threaten Beaumont’s front pad, finding a hint of swing through the air. The openers exchange singles. 2nd over: England 18-0 (Beaumont 9, Bouchier 8) Ayanda Hlubi takes off from the other end, and Bouchier collects her first Test runs with a delicious on-drive for four. A low full toss is then flicked through the leg side for another boundary; England are racing against the red ball. 1st over: England 9-0 (Beaumont 8, Bouchier 0) Marizanne Kapp, South Africa’s premier all-rounder, opens up with the ball against Tammy Beaumont … the batter immediately flicks off her pads to the boundary. Kapp then hits the pads and it looks plumb! But the finger somehow doesn’t go up and Kapp can’t believe it. And here’s the annoying part: there’s no DRS in this match. Beaumont collects another boundary to rub it in. An eventful start. The anthems are underway. In another part of the world, another England Test side have had a bit of a stinker with the bat. South Africa: Laura Wolvaardt (c), Anneke Bosch, Annerie Dercksen, Sune Luus, Marizanne Kapp, Nadine de Klerk, Chloe Tryon, Sinalo Jafta (wk), Tumi Sekhukhune, Nonkululeko Mlaba, Ayanda Hlubi England: Tammy Beaumont, Maia Bouchier, Heather Knight (c), Nat Sciver-Brunt, Danni Wyatt-Hodge, Amy Jones (wk), Charlie Dean, Sophie Ecclestone, Ryana MacDonald-Gay, Lauren Filer, Lauren Bell Maia Bouchier is England’s other debutant in this format, partnering Tammy Beaumont up top. Heather Knight makes the correct call. She confirms the absence of Kate Cross, who sustained a back spasm in the third ODI. That means a Test debut for the 20-year-old Ryana MacDonald-Gay. Hello, hello, hello and welcome to a little slice of history. South Africa’s women are set to play their first Test match at home since … March 2002. It’s been a while. The wait ends in Bloemfontein, with Heather Knight’s side the visitors, aiming to complete an all-format sweep on this tour. England won the T20s 3-0, the ODIs 2-1, and a red-ball win would round things off rather nicely before they set off for the Ashes. Women’s Tests remain a once-in-a-while event, the main battleground still the white-ball stuff, with no domestic long-form scene to prep these two sides for the contest. A win for either team would end lengthy droughts. England haven’t won a red-ball game since January 2014, with nine matches since resulting in four losses and five draws. South Africa have won just one match in their history, against the Netherlands in 2007. Drop me a line with all your thoughts, queries, Sunday plans, whatever you want. And here’s a banger to enjoy … from the charts in March 2002.