Title: UK to provide £50m of emergency aid for vulnerable Syrians
Author: Unknown
Source: guardian
Published: 2024-12-15T18:54:27Z
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2024/dec/15/uk-50m-emergency-aid-syria-assad
----------------------------------------
The UK has announced £50m of humanitarian aid for vulnerable Syrians across the Middle East after the overthrow of Bashar al-Assad’s regime. The emergency support will be delivered through the UN and NGOs to people in the country, in addition to refugees in Lebanon and Jordan, the Foreign Office said on Sunday. On Saturday, the UK joined talks in Aqaba, hosted by Jordan and attended by ministers and delegates from the US, France, Germany, the Arab Contact Group, Bahrain, Qatar, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, the EU and UN. The countries agreed on the importance of a “non-sectarian and representative government”, protecting human rights, unfettered access for humanitarian aid, the safe destruction of chemical weapons, and combating terrorism. “The UK urges the transitional government to adhere to these principles to build a more hopeful, secure and peaceful Syria,” the Foreign Office said. David Lammy, the foreign secretary, said: “The fall of the horrific Assad regime provides a once-in-a-generation chance for the people of Syria. We’re committed to supporting the Syrian people as they chart a new course, first by providing £50m in new food, healthcare and aid to support the humanitarian needs of vulnerable Syrians. Second, by working diplomatically to help secure better governance in Syria’s future. “This weekend, the UK and its partners came together to agree the principles required to support a Syrian-led transitional political process. It is vital that the future Syrian government brings together all groups to establish the stability and respect the Syrian people deserve.” About £120,000 of UK funding has also been made available to the Organisation of the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the department said. Another £30m will be channelled within Syria for food, shelter and emergency healthcare, while £10m will go to the World Food Programme (WFP) in Lebanon and £10m to WFP and the UN’s refugee agency, UNHCR, in Jordan. The intervention comes a week after the collapse of the Assad regime after an offensive by rebel group Hayat Tahrir al-Sham (HTS), ending five decades of dynastic rule as the dictator fled to Moscow. Western governments have subsequently debated how to deal with HTS, which is a proscribed organisation in the UK because of its closeness to al-Qaida. Its current leader, Abu Mohammed al-Jolani – who since taking power has started using his real name, Ahmad al-Sharaa – has attempted to distance his movement from the terrorist group. There is also concern that a power vacuum in Syria could exacerbate regional tensions and create conditions for Islamic State to regain ground. On Friday, Keir Starmer told a virtual meeting of the G7 leaders that “the fall of Assad’s brutal regime should be welcomed but we must be cautious about what comes next”.