Title: Christmas sport gift guide: the best presents for fans of all ages
Author: Unknown
Source: guardian
Published: 2024-12-15T08:00:39Z
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2024/dec/15/christmas-sport-gift-guide-the-best-presents-for-fans-of-all-ages
----------------------------------------
Fun, games and unique For the football fan of any age, a new ball always goes down well with the obvious choice a well-priced Champion League 2025 replica from Decathlon.co.uk. However, for a more rewarding alternative try one of the colourful and striking options from the Alive &amp; Kicking range at Thedifferentkind.com. A not-for-profit organisation producing handmade balls with unique designs in sub-Saharan Africa, creating jobs and contributing to the economy, they also donate balls – football and rugby, beautifully made from locally sourced leather – to local children. For doing the actual kicking, there is excellent value in the Puma Kids Ultra Match boot from Amazon.co.uk. An excellent boot more reasonably priced than the top-end versions in the kid’s market. Lightweight, made from stretchy, woven fabric and laceless, it’s a solid, all-round unisex shoe in a range of bright colours. Once they come back grubby from the match, younger children might be encouraged to scrub up with one of the delightful range of sporty soaps from Chucklesoaps.com. Each one has a sporting-themed item embedded within, such as a football, racing car, rugby player or cricketer, which is eventually freed as the soap is used. They’re hand-poured in Hampshire with a soothing, moisturising lather, too. Away from the pitch, with a decent floor space there is fun to be had with the Smart Ball Indoor Soccer Bot from smythstoys.com. A small disc shaped robot and the special ball it tracks combine to test your touch. It is no Virgil Van Dijk but younger kids will have terrific fun going up against the mechanical opposition to develop their ball control. Mark a sporting moment in elegant style with one of the prints from thegoalhanger.co.uk. The beautiful artwork is created by designer Richard Horsted, using data from live sport – a goal or match, or season – and inspired by artists or art movements such as Jackson Pollock or Constructivism. They are eye-catching, visually inventive and beautifully executed. Better still, choose a personal favourite and Richard will design a bespoke piece of art around it. Style and Substance With Euro 2025 coming up, step up with the Lionesses. Bootandballprints.com have a fine T-shirt and print of England’s player of the year Alessia Russo, rendered in a distinct but understated design. Equally inventive is the Lionesses Subbuteo print T-shirt from etsy.com, with players depicted on plastic bases. Toffs.com also do a nice retro-style Subbuteo-themed England shirt in red and white, which is cheaper and more fun than the real strips. The women’s ODI Cricket World Cup also takes place in India next year and fans would appreciate the lovely wide-brim hat from shop.ecb.co.uk. In a vibrant blue they are perfect for the summer and currently half price. 2025 also sees the Women’s Rugby World Cup, hosted in England and all the home nations represented with replica jerseys at: englandrugbystore.com, shop.scottishrugby.org, store.wru.co.uk and elverys.ie. For toasty headwear, next year’s Ryder Cup at Bethpage, New York has an enormously jolly bobble hat from euroshop.rydercup.com. Blue and white with a multicoloured bobble and fleece-lined, it’s perfect for winter on the links. Pair it with the marvellous socks from new British company Koigolfclub.com. They have put a superb spin on the humble sock with an innovative anti-slip design. The sole and heel of the socks are lined with small rubber grips and while the feeling on first wearing is a little disconcerting by mid-round their purpose, to maintain a solid footing within the shoe more than pays off. A great idea, well executed. To stay warm on the touchline, look no further than the excellent merino wool base layers from Icebreaker.com. The 200 Oasis long-sleeve top and leggings are functionally warm as well as soft and comfortable. With the wicking properties of merino they are a fine investment for any fan looking to endure the cold months to come. They can be set off with the thermal, waterproof socks from sealskinz.com. The Stanfield knee and mid-length versions, merino wool-lined, have great insulation properties and will see off the worst the weather can offer. To complete either an afternoon on the terraces or a long walk, the Moab Speed 2 Gore-Tex shoe from Merrell.com is the perfect footwear. At home for either full hiking, a day on the touchline or merely meandering, they are waterproof and rugged but with a foam padded sole, hugely comfortable and given they are of such sturdy stuff, surprisingly lightweight too, making for a pleasure to wear. Fitness and form Put your best foot forward with the Brooksrunning.com Glycerin Max trainers , an ideal option for new runners or anyone looking to return to fitness. The design features a nitrogen-infused midsole, which translates from shoe jargon into an enormously springy, highly cushioned trainer that infuses a real energetic bound to each step. Easy on the legs, easy on the muscles, a great way for the run-wary to ease back into putting in a few miles. Ensure any sport or workout is perfect down to the smallest detail with the superb sporting and running underwear from uk.stepone. Men’s and women’s styles are made of moisture‑wicking, bamboo viscose, present a smooth, panelled fit to prevent chafing. They’re made to last with an emphasis on comfort but also with a well thought-through design, suited to rigorous usage, are a pleasure to wear on even the longest session and priced very competitively. Equally impressive for all activities is the range from Sweatybetty.com. Their Therma Boost Leggings are a great fit with a semi-high waist. Soft and stretchy, they are warm and easily seen with reflective stitching, which works as a design and a safety feature and with three pockets, they’re ideal winter leggings. Their Power Pro Running Bra also boasts a great, comfortable fit that is true to size and offers high-support, in a range of colours. For colder days working out, the Castore.com Flow training top is a lovely design with a cosy lining, it’s moisture wicking, with a half zip and funnel collar combined into a stylish look. To ensure entertainment but also safety while hitting the streets, the Bose.co.uk Ultra Open Earbuds are a marvellous addition. A lovely piece of design, they sit on the side of the ear so do not block glasses or headwear but are open ear, to allow full spatial awareness of the surroundings, traffic, etc. Given that, they have a hugely impressive sound quality that boasts little of the leakage common in similar models. The fit is light but snug, even with vigorous exercise and boasts strong battery performance. If joining a gym is all too much, make the effort at home with the Reebok Deck from workoutforless.co.uk. This British company formed in 2011 with the aim of making health and fitness more accessible has gone from strength to strength. The Deck is a well-engineered, versatile workout tool, designed to provide a platform for a variety of resistance, weight and aerobic work. With a neatly built adjustable backrest it accommodates a range of exercises across muscle groups and is currently half price. Travelling away For active kids on bikes and grownups too, the range of helmets from Dashel.co.uk are an eye-catching new take on an often functional item. Manufactured in Cornwall they have a stylish, rounded, smooth design with a leading peak. Adjustable inserts allow for a child’s growth, the rear hanging loops are made from recycled ocean plastic and they conform to European safety standards. On top of which the innovative company will recycle them into new versions when their lifespan is complete. To follow live commentary, especially where mobile coverage may be dubious, look no further than the Robertsradio.com Sports DAB5, a pocket-sized digital and FM radio, with a straightforward intuitive operating system, it’s perfect for keeping up on the go. At home, ensure you can follow any major event anywhere around the house with the Beats Pill Bluetooth speaker from Apple.com. Rebooted and updated this year, the much-loved design remains one of the outstanding small speakers, it delivers an expansive sound that belies such a compact and light device, that is as ideal for accompanying a workout as to broadcasting TMS to all at a barbecue. Finally, for going away to follow the team, the Thule.com Chasm duffel, in carry-on or check-in suitcase variations are ideal companions. Constructed from recycled material, exceptionally well-made with strengthened seams, they are sturdy, water resistant and spacious, the wheeled suitcase extending to 110-litres. Practical and good looking pieces of kit, perfect for any away-leg excursions.