Title: Woman dies after shooting in north-west London
Author: Unknown
Source: guardian
Published: 2024-12-15T11:25:56Z
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2024/dec/15/woman-dies-after-shooting-in-brent-north-west-london
----------------------------------------
A woman has died after a triple shooting in Brent, north-west London, on Saturday night. The Metropolitan police said two men, both in their 30s, were also injured, with one taken to hospital where he remained in a critical condition. The other man suffered non-life threatening injuries. Officers were called to Gifford Road at about 9.15pm where the woman, in her 40s, was found injured. She died at the scene. There have been no arrests and police inquiries are ongoing. A resident of Creukhorne Road, who did not wish to be named, told PA Media they had heard five gunshots in a row on Saturday night. Another neighbour, who lives in the road but also did not want to be named, said: “We heard the shooting sound and we thought it was fireworks; we didn’t expect there would be a gun here. People came out of the church, they were at a wake and they saw the bodies on the ground. I heard a lot of crying and screaming.” A cordon was in place at the junction of Gifford Road and Creukhorne Road on Sunday morning, with several uniformed and forensic officers at the scene. Supt Tony Josephs, from the Met’s North West Command Unit, which covers Brent, said: “This is a truly shocking incident that has left a woman dead and two others injured, and I understand the concern this will cause the local community and those across London. “I want to reassure people that a team of experienced detectives are already working at pace to piece together the events of last night and identify whoever was responsible for this heinous act of violence. “If you were in or around Gifford Close at the time of the shooting, or have any information about who was responsible, please get in contact with us. A family has been left devastated and we need to work together to provide them with answers.”