Title: Who is H6, the Chinese businessman with links to Prince Andrew?
Author: Unknown
Source: guardian
Published: 2024-12-15T17:49:10Z
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2024/dec/15/who-is-h6-the-chinese-businessman-with-links-to-prince-andrew
----------------------------------------
A Chinese businessman who some have claimed is regarded as a close confidante of the Duke of York lost his appeal against a decision to bar him from entering the UK on national security grounds. Known only as H6, who is he and what are his links to Prince Andrew? Who is H6? H6 is a businessman and alleged Chinese spy described in court as having formed “an unusual degree of trust” with the Duke of York, and who is now banned from the UK. He was first prevented from entering Britain in 2023 by the then home secretary, Suella Braverman. The Home Office said he was considered to have engaged in “covert and deceptive activity” on behalf of the Chinese Communist party (CCP). A former civil servant, H6 brought legal action for a review of the decision, arguing that it was unlawful. The tribunal in London heard that H6 had said he avoided involvement in politics and had only limited links to the Chinese state. His representative told the tribunal he had never been a senior member of the CCP and had not carried out activities on its behalf. The Chinese embassy in London criticised “baseless ‘spy’ stories targeting China”. Their purpose was “to smear China and disrupt normal exchanges between Chinese and British personnel”, it said. H6, 50, has met two former prime ministers over the past 15 years, according to the Sunday Times – David Cameron at a Downing Street reception and Theresa May at a black-tie event. How do we know this? H6 brought a case to the Special Immigration Appeals Commission (Siac) to appeal against his exclusion from the UK. Judges ruled on Thursday that Braverman had been entitled to conclude that he represented a risk to the national security, and he was granted an interim anonymity order. Reform UK has reportedly said it is prepared to name him despite the anonymity order. How is he linked to Prince Andrew? At a hearing in July, the tribunal was told an adviser to the duke had said H6 could act on his behalf when dealing with potential investors in China, and that H6 had been invited to the duke’s 60th birthday party in 2020. A letter from Andrew’s aide, Dominic Hampshire, was discovered on H6’s devices when he was stopped at a port in 2021. The letter stated: “Outside of his closest internal confidants, you sit at the very top of a tree that many, many people would like to be on.” It has been reported that H6 visited Buckingham Palace twice, and also entered St James’s Palace and Windsor Castle at Andrew’s invitation. A document retrieved from H6’s devices described the duke as “in a desperate situation and will grab on to to anything”. What does Prince Andrew say? A statement from his office on Friday said: “The Duke of York followed advice from His Majesty’s government and ceased all contact with the individual after concerns were raised. The duke met the individual through official channels with nothing of a sensitive nature ever discussed. He is unable to comment further on matters relating to national security.”