Title: Second person dies in NSW after car collides with group of cyclists during race near Armidale
Author: Unknown
Source: guardian
Published: 2024-12-15T20:19:57Z
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2024/dec/14/armidale-nsw-cycling-car-crash-rider-dies-after-collision-with-group-of-riders-ntwnfb
----------------------------------------
A woman in her 30s and a man in his 60s have died after a group of riders and a car collided near Armidale, New South Wales police say. Authorities said the driver of a car and several cyclists had collided about 3.30pm on Saturday before the driver hit a tree on Long Swamp Road. One of the cyclists, later identified as a man in his 60s, died at the scene. The driver, a woman in her 30s, was trapped in the car and was airlifted to the John Hunter hospital in Newcastle. She died on Sunday, authorities confirmed. Three other cyclists – aged 57, 39 and a teenage boy – were injured and treated at the scene. They were taken to hospitals in Armidale and Newcastle all in a stable condition. Sign up for Guardian Australia’s breaking news email The group of cyclists had been taking part in an organised 30km race. The Armidale Bicycle Centre said on Facebook on Sunday: “Our hearts are heavy as we’ve learnt of the tragic accident from yesterday.” “Our thoughts are with the victims, their families and everyone affected by this devastating event. “At this difficult time, we extend our deepest condolences to those mourning their loved ones and wish for a full and speedy recovery to the injured. “Safety is always our priority, and we stand in solidarity with the cycling community and local authorities as they work to support the affected families and prevent future accidents. “We encourage everyone to stay safe on the roads, be mindful of others, and continue to support each other in moments of hardship.” Police said officers from the crash investigation unit had examined the scene. “As investigations into the circumstances surrounding the crash continue, police are urging any witnesses or anyone with dashcam footage to contact local police or Crime Stoppers on 1800 333 000.”