Title: Chelsea see off Brentford but Cucurella’s goal marred by post-match red
Author: Unknown
Source: guardian
Published: 2024-12-15T21:06:22Z
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/2024/dec/15/chelsea-brentford-premier-league-match-report
----------------------------------------
Keeping up the pretence that this is no title challenge is becoming Chelsea’s toughest task. Boosted by Arsenal and Liverpool squandering points on Saturday, Enzo Maresca’s team broke the Brentford curse and delivered in the manner of potential champions by winning a tight game thanks to goals from Marc Cucurella and Nicolas Jackson. Not that Maresca was moved, even after seeing Chelsea end a run of three consecutive home defeats to their neighbours and move two points below Liverpool, albeit having played a game more than the league leaders. It was not lost on the Italian that Robert Sánchez, so often decried as a weak link, had to make a huge save from Christian Nørgaard at 1-0. Fábio Carvalho, the Brentford substitute, also wasted a glorious chance to equalise and composure evaporated after Bryan Mbeumo, capitalising on a mistake from the otherwise excellent Moisés Caicedo, halved the deficit in the 90th minute. Chelsea remain overly excitable. The fact that Cucurella was booked for fouling Carvalho in the 95th minute and then found time to receive a second yellow for pushing Kevin Schade after the final whistle did not say great things about their temperament. There is a wild edge to Chelsea at times and much of it comes from Cucurella, a wind-up merchant who earlier infuriated Vitaly Janelt with a grubby piece of gamesmanship, but they are still learning. Maresca, who will have to adjust at left-back when Cucurella sits out next week’s trip to Everton, still needs to see more control. “No matter how many games we win, I think we are not ready to compete for the title,” Chelsea’s head coach said. “Teams who know how to compete for titles are not going to concede goals like we do today. We cannot open the game and give them a chance.” Still, this was a night of positives for Chelsea. They quelled awkward opponents with hunger and ruthlessness. It was a bruising contest and, when Jackson made it 2-0 in the 80th minute, the crowd erupted. They think that Chelsea are back. Their depth ensured that fatigue and the absence of seven players did not affect them after returning from their Europa Conference League assignment in Kazakhstan. They took control from the start and Jackson was lively against Brentford’s imposing back three, threatening twice during the early stages. Mark Flekken, Brentford’s goalkeeper, was busy. Cole Palmer, quieter than usual, went close from 20 yards and Enzo Fernández attempted to make late runs from midfield. “They are one of the favourites to win the title,” Thomas Frank, the Brentford manager, said of Chelsea. “I know they don’t want to talk about that but look at their players.” Sitting deep, Brentford focused on compressing the space. Ethan Pinnock made a crucial block on Jackson and when Chelsea did threaten on the counter, Jadon Sancho springing Noni Madueke, Yoane Wissa raced back to mop up. Wissa was often isolated up front, although there were moments of hope for Brentford. Chelsea were relieved when Levi Colwill charged down an effort from Mikkel Damsgaard. The competitiveness was high, both sides robust in the tackle. Chelsea pressed impressively, Madueke almost scoring after forcing a turnover, but they needed a spark. An unlikely source provided it when Madueke cut in from the right to cross in the 43rd minute. Brentford’s concentration dipped and Cucurella, all heart, desire and bouncy hair, ran in between Mads Roerslev and Sepp van den Berg to head in his first goal of the season. The left-back was a popular scorer with the home fans, who love the Spaniard’s spikiness, even if it cost him at the end. Once a figure of derision, the former Brighton defender has fought to establish himself. Maresca did not criticise Cucurella’s post-match antics. He focused on how he took on Mbeumo by playing as a mix of full-back and demented roving midfielder. The constant surges overwhelmed Brentford. Chelsea’s intensity was superb; their profligacy less so. Jackson was guilty of a dreadful miss, spooning Sancho’s cross over from close range. Sancho was denied after wriggling through. Still winless away from home this season, Brentford stirred with 20 minutes to go. They went direct and Sánchez brilliantly tipped Nørgaard’s volley over. They attacked down the right but Carvalho hit the bar from close range. When Mbeumo scored, running through to beat Sánchez, it was already 2-0. The clincher came when Carvalho lost possession and Jackson ran at Pinnock. He swerved right, fired past Flekken and, perhaps for the first time this season, Stamford Bridge dared to dream.