Title: Going solo: top European resorts for single skiers
Author: Unknown
Source: guardian
Published: 2024-12-15T10:00:41Z
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2024/dec/15/going-solo-top-european-resorts-for-single-skiers
----------------------------------------
Les Gets, France Holidays for all budgets and levels of single skier are on offer from Ski Gathering, catering for beginners, under-35s and over-50s, with different room types at each hotel (single, twin or triple share, priced accordingly). If a week feels a bit over-long, there are four and five-night breaks available in the French resort of Les Gets, with welcome drinks, communal dinners and the chance to progress as a group. The hotel has its own wellness suite with good-sized pool, and an outdoor hot tub with lovely views. A five-night break from £695 (shared triple) to £1,195 (single) half-board, theskigathering.com Les Deux Alpes, France If skiing alone feels daunting, book a week with singles specialist Friendship Travel, which offers five two-hour, small-group lessons included in the package price. Their Twin Share system offers the chance to save money by sharing a (same-sex) room in their two chalets, Alexandre and Chartreuse, both exclusive to Friendship Travel, meaning that all guests are holidaying alone. The hotel is set right by Le Diable gondola, giving easy access to more than 200km of piste, with communal dinners on five nights. One week from £1,445pp half-board, including transfers and ski lessons (single rooms available), friendshiptravel.com Seefeld, Austria If a ski holiday is as much about enjoying the spectacular scenery as hurtling down pistes, the high-plateau resort of Seefeld makes a great choice, with snow-shoeing, ice-skating, tobogganing and almost 250km of cross-country skiing routes. The Alpenpark Resort has an adults-only spa area, with a panorama relaxation room that’s perfect for a lazy afternoon after a morning on the slopes. It has excellent kids’ facilities, too, including a kids’ club, making this a great choice for single-parent travellers, looking for an affordable family skiing break. One week from £988pp half-board, including transfers, sno.co.uk Flaine, France A solo ski trip can be a great opportunity to improve, with no distractions and all the time you want on the pistes. Freshtracks, from the Ski Club of Great Britain, runs Learn to Ski Powder courses (not for beginners) that tend to attract a number of solo travellers, making them sociable without feeling claustrophobic. Chalet Freshtracks in Flaine is exclusive to the SCGB, sleeping 12 in six rooms – three of which share a bathroom and are normally allotted to single travellers. After a warm-up day, when guests can explore independently, there are daily classes with daily lessons and communal dinners back at base. One week from £1,795pp half-board, including transfers, instruction and guiding, skiclub.co.uk Tignes, France If good snow conditions are a top priority, Tignes is a great choice; at 2,000m high and with many runs above the tree line, there is more than 300km of pistes to explore in the combined Tignes-Val d’Isère area. Mark Warner has deals for single travellers at the Chalet Hotel L’Ecrin, a cosy base built in traditional Savoyard style, a short stroll from the bars, restaurants and ski lifts in Tignes le Lac. Mealtimes are communal affairs, including post-piste afternoon tea, offering a chance to mingle with fellow skiers. One week from £1,259 half-board, including transfers and twin/double room for sole use, markwarner.co.uk Sestriere, Piedmont, Italy Crystal offers a range of holidays for single travellers with no room supplement, including at the buzzy resort of Sestriere, one of Italy’s highest ski resorts at over 2,000m. The Hotel Principe di Piemonte has been refurbished recently and has a revamped bar, restaurant and rooms, and a ski-in, ski-out location that avoids lugging skis around. Experienced skiers can make this a twin-centre break by skiing over the border into Montgenèvre in France. One week from £1,115pp half-board, including transfers, crystalski.co.uk Santa Caterina, Italy Hanging around in queues can be even more frustrating if you’re skiing solo, but high altitude Santa Caterina rarely gets busy and has a fantastic snow record. The resort suits skiers, with a beginners’ area at the mid-station, and spectacular blue and red runs around the Santa Caterina Sun Bowl. The picturesque village is set in glorious scenery, with snow-shoeing and cross-country trails if you fancy a break from downhill, with the pistes floodlit once a week for night skiing. The Hotel Nordik lies just 150m from the nearest chairlift, with has a sauna, hammam and solarium and cosy restaurant and bar. One week from £1,345 half-board, including transfers and a Solostour leader, solosholidays.co.uk Filzmoos, Austria Austria is a great choice for single travellers; many hotels have been run by the same family for generations, guaranteeing a warm, personal welcome. Inghams has a wide choice of hotels that don’t charge a single supplement, including the Hammerhof in the charming village of Filzmoos. An ideal resort for those looking for a quieter break, rather than a party-filled week, Filzmoos has 20km of runs in the village, with a regular, free ski-bus service that connects skiers to the surrounding runs. One week from £794 B&amp;B, including transfers, inghams.co.uk Bad Gastein, Austria If a week feels a bit long for a solo ski jaunt, book a few nights at Das Regina, a gloriously old-school hotel that gears up for DJ and party nights in the evening, with breakfast rolling on until 11am and a small private cinema along with a Finnish sauna and spa treatments. Bad Gastein is one of Austria’s most elegant resorts, with a rich history as a spa town and streets lined with Belle Epoque villas and hotels. A smaller ski area than some, with just 80km of pistes, the scenery is spectacular, particularly from the viewing platform on the Stubnerkogel suspension bridge. Single-occupancy rooms from £118 B&amp;B, welcomebeyond.com Sauze d’Oulx, Italy If it’s a while since you’ve been on skis, or your technique needs a bit of a polish, a week with Neilson – it offers free coaching and guides– is ideal. Sauze is traffic-free, giving it a peaceful feel by day, though it livens up considerably at night. The town is a gateway to the Milky Way’s 400km of piste, with gentle blue runs and more than 200km of more challenging reds. The Neilson Chalet Hotel Edelweiss is in a peaceful position, set back from the main part of town, at the base of the Bischofsmütze mountain. A week from £794pp half-board, including transfers, neilson.co.uk.