Title: Bali Nine: who were they?
Author: Unknown
Source: guardian
Published: 2024-12-15T08:22:51Z
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2024/dec/01/bali-nine-who-were-they
----------------------------------------
Andrew Chan The then 22-year-old was described as a ringleader and organiser of the smuggling plot along with Myuran Sukumaran. He was arrested at Denpasar airport. Chan became a committed Christian in prison and married his fiancee, Febyanti Herewila, days before his death. He was executed by firing squad as he sang songs of praise in 2015. Myuran Sukumaran Sukumaran was the alleged ringleader of the plot with Chan. He was sentenced to death in 2006 and numerous appeals to have it commuted were rejected. He became a prolific painter in prison, giving lessons to other prisoners. He painted striking self-portraits and an image of the Indonesian flag dripping in blood. He was executed, alongside Chan, by firing squad in 2015. Tan Duc Thanh Nguyen Nguyen was arrested at a Kuta hotel. Originally given a life sentence, it was reduced to 20 years on appeal before, on cross-appeal, being sentenced to death. His original life sentence was then re-imposed. He died of kidney cancer in 2018, aged 34. Renae Lawrence The only woman in the group, Lawrence was arrested at Denpasar airport with 2.7kg of heroin strapped to her body. She was sentenced to life imprisonment, subsequently reduced to 20 years, with further years then taken off for good behaviour. She was released in 2018 after serving 13 years and returned to Australia. In 2020, she made a public plea for the remaining members of the Bali Nine to have their sentences reduced. Si-Yi Chen Chen, then 20, was arrested at a hotel at Kuta Beach. He was originally sentenced to life in prison with no chance of parole, subsequently reduced to 20 years. This was appealed by prosecutors, and he was sentenced to death, subsequently reduced to life in prison. Chen ran a silversmith workshop in Bali’s Kerobokan prison, teaching other prisoners to make jewellery. He returned to Australia on Sunday. Michael Czugaj Czugaj, then 19, was arrested at Denpasar airport with 1.75kg of heroin strapped to his body. He was sentenced to life imprisonment with no chance of release. His sentence was briefly reduced to 20 years before his life sentence was reimposed. He was later transferred to a prison in Java. He returned to Australia on Sunday. Matthew Norman Norman –the youngest member of the Bali Nine – was 18 when he was arrested at a Kuta hotel. He was sentenced to life in prison, a term that was reduced to 20 years, then increased to execution, before being reinstated as life without chance of parole. He remained in Bali’s Kerobokan prison, where he ran English and computer classes for fellow prisoners. He returned to Australia on Sunday. Scott Rush Rush was arrested at Denpasar airport with 1.3kg of heroin taped to his body. He was 19. Rush was sentenced to life imprisonment, subsequently increased to execution, before his life sentence was reinstated. He returned to Australia on Sunday. Martin Stephens Stephens – the oldest of the group – was on his first trip to Bali at 29. He was arrested at Denpasar airport with 3.3kg of heroin strapped to his body. He was sentenced to life in prison without chance of parole. Numerous appeals for commutation were rejected. Stephens was in prison in Java. He is married and has a daughter. He returned to Australia on Sunday.