Title: Sunday with Eddie Hearn: ‘Everyone attends Mum’s roast dinner or they’re in big trouble’
Author: Unknown
Source: guardian
Published: 2024-12-15T06:45:37Z
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2024/dec/15/sunday-with-eddie-hearn-everyone-attends-mums-roast-dinner-or-theyre-in-big-trouble
----------------------------------------
Sundays to you? The Hearn household historically attends the roast dinner or you are in big trouble. My mum, who moans about cooking a roast dinner, cooks one every Sunday. Even at Christmas, when someone else offers to cook, she looks heavily insulted. Are you a good father/son? Because of my schedule and international fights, Sundays have become irregular. I’ll race back to watch my youngest daughter play football and take my eldest daughter out somewhere with her friends. But, most importantly, I try to get over to my mum’s in time for the roast. Is dinner in the oven if you’re late? Absolutely not. You’re either there at 1pm or you can stick it up your behind. Although there is sometimes the option for bangers and mash, gammon and chips, shepherd’s pie or toad in the hole around 5pm. Sundays growing up? I remember both sets of grandparents, aunties and uncles, sometimes my great-grandmother coming over. Then, in the evening, my nanny Joan would bring over a fresh crusty loaf and cut me three or four sausage sandwiches. That was a real treat. Sunday me time? As soon as I have had the roast, it’s comatose time. I’ll sneak off to try to get 10 or 15 minutes of kip to set me up to take my daughters out or my nephews down to the lake for a bit of fishing with my dad. But I’m normally interrupted by a Magnum or Cornetto, which is a must after a roast. Monday prep? I spend most days trying to be as healthy as possible. Sunday is the one day that historically lets me down. I get home from Mum and Dad’s and think, ‘just a little packet of crisps will be nice’ and the next thing it’s 9pm. I’m a terrible procrastinator. If I’m going to the airport at 5am, I’d rather get up at 3.30am and pack. Sundays, my belly is full. Just get me in bed and let me sleep off this food coma. The Oleksandr Usyk v Tyson Fury fight is on 21 December. Watch it live on DAZN