Title: Georgina Hayden’s recipe for chocolate and clementine cassata semifreddo
Author: Unknown
Source: guardian
Published: 2024-12-15T10:00:41Z
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/food/2024/dec/15/chocolate-clementine-cassata-semifreddo-recipe-georgina-hayden
----------------------------------------
The pressure to be an effortless host over the Christmas season is high, and my biggest tip is to have a thoughtfully stocked freezer. As well as batch-making mince pies, biscuit logs and vol-au-vents, I love a festive-themed ice-cream or, in this instance, semifreddo. This cassata-inspired one is my new festive favourite – it’s embarrassingly easy (pretend it’s harder, if you like) and triumphs on so many Christmas flavours. Decorate as elaborately as you wish, piling it high with glacé fruits and marzipan sculptures, or just with a glossy, chocolate glaze. Chocolate and clementine cassata semifreddo Prep 10 min Cook 30 min Freeze 6 hr+ Serves 8-10 250g ricotta 250g mascarpone 397g tin condensed milk Zest of 2 clementines 150g glacé fruits, chopped, plus extra to decorate 75g pistachios, roughly chopped 75g marzipan, finely chopped 150g dark chocolate, finely chopped 2 tbsp neutral oil (eg, groundnut, vegetable) A good pinch of sea salt Line a 2lb loaf tin with clingfilm, leaving some overhang. Put the ricotta in the bowl of a freestanding mixer and beat smooth. Beat in the mascarpone until smooth, then add the condensed milk and clementine zest, and beat again. Fold in the chopped glacé fruits, pistachios, marzipan and 60g of the chopped chocolate, then pour into the lined tin, cover with the clingfilm overhang and put in the freezer for at least six hours, or until set. Take the loaf tin out of the freezer half an hour before you want to serve. Melt the remaining chocolate with the oil in a microwave or in a bowl set over a pan of simmering water (making sure the base of the bowl doesn’t touch the water), then stir in the sea salt and leave to cool. Turn out the semifreddo on to a platter or board, drizzle with the cooled, molten chocolate, garnish with glacé fruits, then slice and serve.